विदे श व्यापार महानिदे शालय

Ministry of Commerce & Industry
Government of India

documents has How to export , GST & Export & EXPORT
SCHEMES details

DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF
FOREIGN TRADE

HOW TO EXPORT
A practical guide

NIRYAT
BANDHU
SCHEME
(2023-24)

PREFACE
THIS BOOKLET IS PUBLISHED FOR THE EDUCATIONAL & TRAINING PURPOSE
ONLY. THE ENTREPRENEURS/EXPORTERS/TRADERS & POTENTIAL EXPORTERS
MAY USE THIS AS BRIEF PRACTICAL REFERENCE FOR HOW TO EXPORT. THIS
PRATICAL GUIDE HAVE BEEN PREPARED KEEPING IN MIND THE INITIAL
PROCEDURES, DOCUMENTS, ORGANISATIONS WHOSE KNOWLEDGE IS
NECESSARY FOR STARTING EXPORT. THE BOOKLET GUIDES EXPORTING ANY
PRODUCT.

This booklet is published Under Niryat Bandhu scheme by
OFFICE OF THE JOINT DIRECTOR GENERAL OF FOREIGN TRADE
D.NO.43-9-226, SRI PRIYA COMPLEX, RAILWAY NEW COLONY
Visakhapatnam – 530016
Phone:0891-2751420, 2747146 & 2550067
e-mail: visakhapatnam-dgft@nic.in

CONTENT
CHAPTER

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Introduction
How to Start Enterprise / Setting Export Business
Importer Exporter Code (IEC)
ITC HS Codes
Policy
Incoterms
Packaging
Export Documentation
Merchant / Third Party Exports
E-Commerce
Freight Forwarder
Containerised & Non Containerised Cargo
Organisations Associated with Export Promotion
Manufacturing / Processing Exports
Finance / Loans
Logistics / Cold Chain
SPS & TBT
Export Promotion Schemes
EPCG
Advance Authorization
Incentives
Foreign Exchange Fluctuations
General Provisions Regarding Import & Exports
BRC / e-BRC
Important Statistics
References

PAGE N O

1
2
7
10
18
20
26
31
33
34
37
39
47
61
64
66
70
72
75
77
78
80
80
83
85
91

HOW TO EXPORT
A practical guide
Exports are one of the fundamental drivers of growth for any economy. It can
influence a country's GDP, exchange rate, level of inflation as well as interest rates.
A robust export data is beneficial as it leads to increase in job opportunities,
enhances foreign currency reserves, boosts manufacturing and also increases
government's revenue collection. It is also a good means by which a country can bring
itself out of the recession phase.
Exporting to countries with a favourable economic climate helps in increasing
the GDP levels as well as helps in reducing unemployment.
Entering international markets is a long and complex process that requires
companies/entrepreneurs to allocate numerous resources in terms of time and
money. However, it is a rewarding effort because exporting is also the fastest way to
internationalise a company / business -a strategy that facilitates long-term
survival Exporting is an investment that can be very profitable if carried out
right the main advantages that exporting offers to any business or company.

1. Increasing Profit Margins:
Exporting products manufactured in countries with low production costs to
markets where the retail price may be higher is a way to achieve higher profit margins.
Moreover, exporting is a way to reduce costs and increase revenues—two variables that lead
to profit growth.

2. Reducing Production Cost per Unit:
It is usually necessary to increase production to enter new markets. This is a
gateway to achieve economies of scale, generate large business volumes and
reduce production costs per unit.

3. Improving Liquidity:
Payment terms with low financial risk—such as full or partial advance
payment, letter of credit or documentary collection—are common in exports. Thanks to
them, the exporting company reduces the risk of the operation, increases cash flow
and has more liquidity at its disposal.

4. Enhancing Competitiveness:
The mere fact of competing in new markets against new companies is a test
for the exporter and its products or services. Continuous adaptation becomes
essential, generating a constant evolution that leads to a permanent improvement of
processes, strategies, equipment, etc. In short, the exporting company becomes
increasingly competitive.

5. Operating in Markets with Less Competition:
Before starting to export, it is essential to choose the country in which we
want to sell our products and services. A good market research should take into
1|P ag e

account the export costs derived from transport, the customs tariffs and the
competition that exists in each market. One of our priorities must be to export to
countries where our products and services have less competition.

HOW TO START ENTERPRISE / SETTING UP EXPORT BUSINESS
Export in itself is a very wide concept and lot of preparations is required by an
exporter before starting an export business. To start export business, the following
steps may be followed:

1) Establishing an Organisation:
To start the export business / start up, first a sole Proprietary concern/
Partnership firm/Company has to be set up as per procedure with an attractive name
and logo. Any business or an enterprise must register legally under the Companies
Act of 2013. There are a total of seven types of company registration in India. Due to
several options, it’s overwhelming to choose the right kind of company registration.

Types of Companies and Various Company Registration Process:
The businesses are classified into multiple categories based on size, the
number of employees, liability, access to capital, etc., under the “Companies Act of
2013.”


Types of Companies Based on Size: Micro, Small, and Medium companies



Types of Companies Based on Number of Employees: Private, Public, and One
Person companies



Types of Companies Based on Control: Holding, Subsidiary, and Associate
companies



Types of Companies Based on Liability: Unlimited and Limited by shares



Types of Companies Based on Capital Accessibility: Listed and Unlisted
companies.

There are seven types of company registrations –
I.

Private Limited Company

II.

Public Limited Company

III.

Partnerships Company

IV.

Limited Liability Partnership

V.

One Person Company

VI.

Sole Proprietorship

VII.

Section 8 Company

2|P ag e

I. Private Limited Company:
If you’d like to enjoy your company as a private entity, private limited
company registration is an ideal choice. Usually, the shareholders take the
responsibility of liabilities equally to safeguard their assets. In these companies, the
net capital is the total shares held by each shareholder. Unlike many other companies,
the private limited company shares aren’t eligible to trade or transfer publicly.
As per the Companies Act of 2013, an enterprise is said to be a private limited
company if it meets the following criteria.


It should consist of at least two directors and utmost fifteen directors.



One director must be an Indian resident.



The minimum and maximum shareholders of the company should be two and
200, respectively.



It should possess a reliable capital fee of a minimum of ₹1,00,000.



It should have a registered office address within India.

II. Public Limited Company:
Unlike private limited companies, the share of the public limited company can
be held by the general public. It’s established according to company law and can be
traded on the stock exchange platforms without a hitch. These types of companies
should register for the ROC certification before actively participating in any
commercial activities.

III. Partnership Company:
This type of company reflects sole proprietorship in several ways. However,
the significant difference between sole proprietorship and partnership is the number of
people involved. Partnership businesses consist of two or more people in which the
responsibility of each member is stated in the agreement clearly.
Meanwhile, the profits are also shared by the partners based on the
agreement. In contrast, the partners are also responsible for taking up losses similar
to that of profits. These companies can run their businesses even without a license if
they have registered a Partnership Deed. The partnership companies are controlled
under the Indian Partnership Act of 1932.

IV. Limited Liability Partnership:
LLP is relatively a new trend where business assets are entirely different from
personal assets and provide ultimate limited liability protection. In this company, the
partners depend on the quantity of share capital to pay the liabilities.
If you’d like to establish an LLP, one of the important requirements is that
you must maintain a minimum capital of ₹1,00,000 with at least one of the partners
from this country.
3|P ag e

V. One Person Company:
One Person Company registration entered the Indian market recently. Most
small businesses or start-ups run by a single person choose this kind of registration.
Under this registration, the owners get liability protection, so they don’t even require
any partnerships.
It’s pretty easy to maintain, handle, and run as a single person controls each
aspect of the business. In a nutshell, it’s the blend of sole proprietorship and private
limited company. The eligibility criteria to avail of this registration are the minimum
capital amount should be about ₹1,00,000. If you’re into a finance business, then you
aren’t qualified to get an OPC registration And the individual must be an Indian
citizen.

VI. Sole Proprietorship:
The sole proprietorship is nothing but a company run by a single person.
Usually, in sole proprietorship companies, the owner is responsible for all profits or
losses. It’s an individual company and pretty easy to set up the business. Mostly work
from home or businesses run from home by a single person prefer this type of
registration.

VII. Section 8 Companies:
These companies are most commonly known as NGOs or Non-Profit
Organizations that actively participate in charity works. The major aim of these
companies is to encourage arts, science, education, safeguard the environment, and
help the needy.
The few conditions to get an NGO registration are it must have at least two
shareholders and directors. In most cases, the shareholders take the responsibility as
directors. Unlike many other companies, this doesn’t require any capital. Any one of
the directors should be an Indian resident, and the company should register at an
Indian address.

Registrar of Companies (RoC):
Registrars of Companies (ROC) appointed under Section 609 of the
Companies Act covering the various States and Union Territories are vested with the
primary duty of registering companies and LLPs floated in the respective states and
the Union Territories and ensuring that such companies and LLPs comply with
statutory requirements under the Act.

Apply For DIN:
The concept of a Director Identification Number (DIN) has been introduced for
the first time with the insertion of Sections 266A to 266G of Companies (Amendment)
Act, 2006. As such, all the existing and intending Directors have to obtain DIN within
the prescribed time-frame as notified.

4|P ag e

MOA and AOA of a Company under Companies Act:
A company must prepare certain preliminary documents before applying for
company registration. The Memorandum of Association (MOA) and Articles of
Association (AOA) are two such preliminary documents that every company must
prepare. The MOA and AOA should be filed with the Registrar of the Companies (ROC)
along with the company incorporation form.
The Memorandum of Association (MOA) and Articles of Association (AOA)
define a company’s scope of work, objectives, rules and internal management. The
MOA and AOA are two essential documents that are the basis of the company’s
constitution. They are indispensable, and the company’s foundation stands upon
them. Therefore, the founders of a company must draft them with utmost clarity and
precision.

Memorandum of Association (MOA) of a Company:
A Memorandum of Association (MOA) is a document containing details of the
company’s constitution and is the foundation of the company’s structure. It is known
as the charter of a company. It lays down the scope of the company’s activities,
objectives for which it is formed, determine the scope of its authority and its
relationship with the outside world.
The creation of an MOA is the first step towards company registration. During
the formation of a company, the company members must subscribe to the MOA.
Subscribing to an MOA means to put one’s mark or signature on the document as
attestation or approval of its contents.

Articles of Association (AOA) of a Company:
The Articles of Association (AOA) of the company contains its rules or byelaws and regulations that control or govern the conduct of its business and manage its
internal affairs. The AOA is subordinate to the MOA of a company and is governed by
the MOA. Every company must have an AOA as it plays a vital role in defining its
internal rights, workings, management and duties. The contents of AOA should be in
sync with the MoA and the Companies Act, 2013.

2. Opening a Bank Account
A current account with a Bank authorized to deal in Foreign Exchange should
be opened.
A Current Account is an account that is meant for businesses, professionals,
trusts, associations, societies, institutions, etc. It provides the account holder with a
wide range of benefits, including restriction free deposits and withdrawals, a higher
number of free cheques available per month, convenient transfers and deposits in
different branches, and even an overdraft facility. All this makes a Current Account a
must have for traders, businessmen, institutions and professionals.
5|P ag e

Opening a Current Account is very simple. Many banks have a provision for
opening the bank account online. Once the form is submitted, a customer care
executive from the bank gets back to the customer to complete all further formalities.
To complete the account opening, there are certain documents which are
required. Once these documents are submitted to the bank, the account opening
formalities can be completed, and the Current Account can be opened.

Documents required for opening a Current Account:
Here are the documents required for opening a Current Account:


Proof of identity of the proprietor /trader /professional /institution/ association,
etc. such as the PAN card. Additional documents for individuals include voter ID,
passport and driving licence.



Proof of address for an individual: Telephone bill, electric bill.



Proof of the existence of the business

Obtaining Permanent Account Number (PAN):
It is necessary for every exporter and importer to obtain a PAN from the
Income Tax Department.
PAN card application can be applied online or offline. Further, requests for
changes or correction in PAN data may also be made online. The online process is the
most hassle-free way of obtaining PAN. The applicant is only required to fill and
submit the online application form along with online payment of the respective
processing fee. Copies of required documents can then be sent by post to either NSDL
or UTIITSL, for verification purposes.

How to apply for PAN Card Online via NSDL Website:
Step 1: Select the PAN card application - 'New PAN Indian Citizen (Form 49A)'
available on the NSDL website.
Step 2: Fill in all the details in the form. Read the detailed instructions before filling
the details on the PAN card application form.
Step 3: Pay the required fees. The PAN card application fees varies on the option you
choose for dispatch of your PAN card. Payment can be made through
credit/debit card, demand draft or net-banking. Upon successful payment,
acknowledgment will be displayed through which you can check your
application status. It will also be sent to your email ID.
Step 4: Send the required documents through courier/post to the NSDL office. Only
after the receipt of the documents, PAN application would be processed by
NSDL. Once the NSDL verifies the application and documents, it will issue
the PAN card in 15 days.

How to apply for PAN Card Online via UTIITSL Website:
6|P ag e

Step 1: Fill the PAN card application available on the UTIITSL website.
Step 2: Pay the application fee. On successful payment, acknowledgment will be
displayed. It will also be sent to your email ID.
Step 3: Send the documents to the UTIITSL office by courier within 15 days of online
submission of Form 49A.
The UTIITSL will process the application and documents and issue the PAN
card within 15 days.

Documents Required for PAN Card:
The required documents to be submitted along with the PAN card application:


Identity proof



Address proof



Date of birth proof



Registration certificate in case of companies, firms, HUF and association of
persons.

4) Obtaining Importer-Exporter Code (IEC):
The Importer -Exporter Code (IEC) is a key business identification number
which is mandatory for Exports or Imports. No person shall make any import or export
except under an IEC granted by the DGFT. In case of import or export of services or
technology, the IEC shall be required only when the service or technology provider is
taking benefits under the Foreign Trade Policy or is dealing with specified services or
technologies.
The nature of the firm obtaining an IEC may be any of the follows"Proprietorship, Partnership, LLP, Limited Company, Trust, HUF and Society."
Consequent upon introduction of GST, IEC number is the same as the PAN of
the firm.
The IEC would be separately issued by DGFT.

Procedure of IEC Code Registration Steps for IEC Registration Process:
 Step 1: Go to the DGFT Website.
 Step 2: Then you need to go on Services tab.
 Step 3: Enter your PAN number (A Person/if any Company PAN Card)
 Step 4: Enter the your details (As Mentioned on PAN Card)
 Step 5: Enter your mobile number and mail ID to get (OTP) verification process.
 Step 6: Fill and Update Application Entity Details
7|P ag e

 Step 7: Add Branch Details (Within 15 minutes)
 Step 8: Fill and update the Director/Partner details.
 Step 9: Upload Documents Scanned Copies of Essential Documents.
 Step 10: Fee Payment (Debit/Credit Card Net Banking)
 Step 11: Preview & Print Application
 Step 12: Final Submission

Documents Required:
1. E-mail & Mobile Number
2. PAN Card
3. Address Proof
(Aadhar Card or Passport or Voter ID is accepted for proprietary ship.
For other forms documents like Sale deed, Rent agreement, lease deed,
etc are accepted.)
4. Valid Bank Account in the name of applicant with pre-printed cancelled
cheque
5. Fees of Rs.500/- with applicable taxes can be paid via Net Banking, Debit Card
or Credit Card.

BENEFITS OF IEC:
Open International Market IEC helps you in taking your organization and
products to the worldwide market and develop your organizations. You can also
sell your products on international platforms
Product scaling and Increased Revenue there will be a vast increase in the
revenue of the organization
Several benefits are availed the organization and various companies can avail
several benefits from DGFT, customs, etc as per the IEC registration. On Exports
the organization can claim tax benefits as well
No need of any renewal IEC code is successful for the lifetime of a substance and
requires no recharging. It could also be utilized by a substance against all fare
and import exchanges








WHEN YOU REQUIRE IEC:





If an importer needs to clear his shipments from the traditions at that time IEC
is required by the traditions experts
When in importer sends cash to another country through banks at that point
IEC is required by the bank
At the point when an exporter needs to send his shipments then its required by
the traditions port
When an exporter receives foreign currency in his bank account, IEC is required

NEEDS OF IEC:
8|P ag e






Importer needs IEC License for custom clearance.
Exporters need IEC License for export subsidy.
Bank requires IEC License for sending and receiving money to foreign
customers.
For Food Licensing and APEDA Licensing IEC is required.

5) Registration cum membership certificate (RCMC)
Registration-Cum-Membership Certificate (RCMC) is a certificate that
validates an exporter dealing with products registered with an agency/ organization
that the Indian Government authorizes.
As mentioned above, an exporter desiring to obtain an RCMC has to file an
application in Form ANF 2C with the concerned Export Promotional Council (EPC) and
declare his mainstream business in the application. With this Trade Notice, DGFT
informed that a new Common Digital Platform (DGFT e-RCMC module) for Issuance of
RCMC/RC had been developed, which would be single-point access for all exporters &
importers.
There are 27 Export promotion councils and nine commodities boards in
India. Export Promotional Councils (EPC) and Commodities board in India are the
authorities for issuing the RCMC.
Each of the Export Promotion Councils and commodities boards in India
categorizes itself according to the Type of products.


In case an export product is not covered by any Export Promotion
Council/Commodity Board etc., RCMC in respect thereof is to be obtained from
FIEO.



Further, in case of multi-product is yet to be settled, the exporter has an option
to obtain RCMC from the Federation of Indian Exporters Organization (FIEO).



Regarding multi-product exporters having their head office/registered office in
the North Eastern States, RCMC may be obtained from Shellac & Forest
Products Export Promotion Council (except for the products looked after
by APEDA, Spices Board, and Tea Board).



In respect of exporters of handicrafts and handloom products from the State of
Jammu & Kashmir, the Director, Handicrafts, Government of Jammu &
Kashmir, is authorized to issue Registration Cum Membership Certificate
(RCMC)

9|P ag e

6) Selection of product:
All items are freely exportable except few items appearing in prohibited/
restricted list.
After studying the trends of export of different products from India proper
selection of the product(s) to be exported may be made.

ITC-HS Code
Introduction:
ITC-HS Codes or better known as Indian Trade Classification based on
Harmonized
System
of
Coding
was
adopted
in
India
for
import-export operations. Indian custom uses an eight digit ITC-HS Codes to suit the
national trade requirements.

ITC-HS Codes Schedules:
ITC-HS codes are divided into two schedules.
ITC (HS) Import Schedule I describe the rules and guidelines related to import
policies where as Schedule II describe the rules and regulation related to export
policies. Schedule I of the ITC-HS code is divided into 22 sections and each section is
further divided into chapters. The total number of chapters in the schedule I is 99.
The chapters are further divided into sub-heading under which different HS codes are
mentioned. Export Policy Schedule II of the ITC-HS code contains 98 chapters giving
all the details about the guidelines related to the export policies.

Governing Body of ITC (HS) Code:
Any changes or formulation or addition of new codes in ITC-HS Codes are
carried out by DGFT (Directorate General of Foreign Trade). Commodity description,
weeding out of defunct codes, addition of new codes, change of product description
etc., are taken up periodically as a part of the ongoing process towards perfection.

How to read ITC HS Code
For example – HS code is- 76069299
In the above harmonized code there are 8 digits. We can break the digits as
given below
HS classification Code list
•

First 2 digits from the left side (76) - Chapter

•

4 digits from the left side (7606) - Heading

•

6 digits from the left side (760692) – Sub Heading

•

8 digits from the left side (76069299) – Regional Tariff

10 | P a g e

ITC HS CODE SYSTEM:
SECTION - 01 (Chapter 01 TO 05)
SECTION I - LIVE ANIMALS; ANIMAL PRODUCTS
Description
-01 Live Animals
-02 Meat and Edible Meat Offal
-03 Fish and Crustaceans, Molluscs and other Aquatic Invertebrates
-04 Birds’ Eggs; Natural Honey; Edible Products of Animal Origin, not
elsewhere specified or included
-05 Products of Animal Origin, Not Elsewhere Specified or Included

SECTION - 02 (Chapter 06 TO 14)
SECTION II - VEGETABLE PRODUCTS
Description
-06 Live Trees and other Plants; Bulb, Roots and the Like; Cut Flowers
and Ornamental Foliage
-07 Vegetable seeds; Edible Vegetables and Certain Roots and Tubers
-08 Edible Fruit and Nuts; Peel of Citrus Fruit or Melons
-09 Coffee, Tea, Mate and Spices
-10 Cereals
-11 Products of the Milling Industry; Malt; Starches; Inulin Wheat Gluten
-12 Oil Seeds and Oleaginous Fruits; Miscellaneous Grains, Seeds and
Fruit; Industrial or Medicinal Plants; Straw and Fodder
-13 Lac; Gums, Resins and Other Vegetable Saps and Extracts
-14 Vegetable Plaiting Materials; Vegetable Products not Elsewhere
Specified or Include

SECTION - 03 (Chapter 15)
SECTION III - ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE FATS AND OILS AND THEIR
CLEAVAGE PRODUCTS; PREPARED EDIBLE FATS;
ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE WAXES
Description
-15 Animals or Vegetable Fats and Oils and their Cleavage Products;
Prepared Edible Fats; Animal or Vegetable Waxes
11 | P a g e

SECTION - 04 (Chapter 16 TO 24)
SECTION IV – PREPARED FOODSTUFFS; BEVERAGES, SPIRITS AND
VINEGAR; TOBACCO AND MANUFACTURED TABACCO
SUBSTITUTES
Description
-16 Preparations of Meat, of Fish or of Crustaceans, Molluscs or Other
Aquatic Invertebrates
-17 Sugars and Sugar Confectionery
-18 Cocoa and Cocoa Preparations
-19 Preparations of Cereals, Flour, Starch or Milk; Pastry cooks’ Products
-20 Preparations of Vegetables, Fruit, Nuts or other Parts of Plants
-21 Miscellaneous Edible Preparations
-22 Beverages, Spirits and Vinegar
-23 Residues and Waste from the Food Industries; Prepared Animal
Fodder
-24 Tobacco and Manufactures; Tobacco Substitutes.

SECTION - 05 (Chapter 25 TO 27)
SECTION V - MINERAL PRODUCTS
Description
-25 Salt; Sulphur; Earths and Stone; Plastering Materials, Lime and
Cement
-26 Ores, Slag and Ash
-27 Mineral Fuels, Mineral Oils and Products of their Distillation;
Bituminous Substances; Mineral Waxes

SECTION - 06 (Chapter 28 TO 38)
SECTION VI - PRODUCTS OF THE CHEMICALS OR ALLIED INDUSTRIES
Description
-28 Inorganic Chemicals; Organic or Inorganic Compounds of Precious
Metals, of Rare-earth Metals, of Radioactive Elements of Isotopes
-29 Organic Chemicals
-30 Pharmaceutical Products
-31 Fertilisers
12 | P a g e

-32 Dyeing Extracts; Tannins and their Derivatives; Dyes, Pigments and
other Colouring Matter; Paints and Varnishes; Putty and other
Mastics; inks
-33 Essential Oils and Resinoids; Perfumery Cosmetic or Toilet
Preparations
-34 Soap, Organic Surface- Active Agents, Washing Preparations,
Lubricating Preparations, Artificial Waxes, Prepared Waxes, Polishing
or Scouring Preparations, Candles and Similar Articles, Modelling
Pastes, “Dental Waxes” and Dental Preparations
-35 Albuminoidal Substances; Modified Starches; Glues; Enzymes
-36 Explosives; Pyrotechnic Products; Matches; Pyrophoric Alloys;
Certain Combustible Preparations
-37 Photographic or Cinematographic Goods
-38 Miscellaneous Chemical Products

SECTION - 07 (Chapter 39 TO 40)
SECTION VII - PLASTICS AND ARTICLES THEREOF; RUBBER AND
ARTICLES THEREOF
Description
-39 Plastics and Articles thereof
-40 Rubber and Articles thereof

SECTION - 08 (Chapter 41 TO 43)
SECTION VIII - RAW HIDES AND SKINS, LEATHER, FURSKINS AND
ARTICLES THEREOF; SADDLERY AND HARNESS;
TRAVEL GOODS, HANDBAGS AND SIMILAR
CONTAINERS; ARTICLES OF ANIMAL GUT (OTHER
THAN SILK-WORM GUT)
Description
-41 Raw Hides and Skins (Other than Furskins) and Leather
-42 Articles of Leather; Saddlery and Harness; Travel Goods, Handbags
and similar containers; Articles of Animal Gut (other than Silk-worm
Gut)
-43 Furskins and Artificial Fur; Manufactures thereof
13 | P a g e

SECTION - 09 (Chapter 44 TO 46)
SECTION IX - WOOD AND ARTICLES OF WOOD; WOOD CHARCOAL;
CORK AND ARTICLES OR CORK; MANUFACTURES OF
STRAW, OF ESPARTO OR OF OTHER PLAITING
MATERIALS; BASKETWARE AND WICKERWORK
Description
-44 Wood and Articles of Wood; Wood Charcoal
-45 Cork and Articles of Cork
-46 Manufactures of Straw, of Esparto or of other
Plaiting Materials; Basket ware And Wickerwork

SECTION - 10 (Chapter 47 TO 49)
SECTION X - PULP OF WOOD OR OF OTHER FIBROUS CELLULOSIC MATERIAL
RECOVERED (WASTE AND SCRAP) PAPER OR PAPERBOARD; PAPER
AND PAPERBOARD AND ARTICLES THEREOF
Description
-47 Pulp of Wood or of other Fibrous Cellulosic Material; Recovered
(Waste and Scrap) Paper or Paperboard
-48 Paper and Paperboard; Article of Paper Pulp, of Paper or of
Paperboard Currency Paper (Water-mark Bank Note Paper)
-49 Printed Books, Newspapers, Pictures and other Products of the
Printing Industry; Manuscripts, Typescripts and Plans

SECTION - 11 (Chapter 50 TO 63)
SECTION XI - TEXTILE AND TEXTILE ARTICLES
Description
-50 Silk
-51 Wool, Fine or Coarse Animal Hair, Horse Hair Yarn and Woven Fabric
-52 Cotton
-53 Other Vegetable Textile Fibres; Paper Yarn and Woven Fabrics of
Paper Yarn
-54 Man-made Filaments
-55 Man – made Staple Fibres
-56 Wadding, Felt and Nonwovens; Special Yarns; Twine, Cordage, Ropes
14 | P a g e

and Cables and Articles thereof
-57 Carpets and Other Textile Floor Coverings
-58 Special Woven Fabrics; Tufted Textile Fabrics; Lace; Tapestries;
Trimmings; Embroidery
-59 Impregnated, Coated, Covered or Laminated Textile Fabrics; Textile
Articles of a Kind Suitable for Industrial Use
-60 Knitted or Crocheted Fabrics
-61 Articles of Apparel and Clothing Accessories, Knitted or Crocheted
-62 Articles of apparel and clothing accessories not knitted or crocheted
-63 Other made up textile articles; sets; worn clothing and worn textile
articles; rags

SECTION - 12 (Chapter 64 TO 67)
SECTION XII - FOOTWEAR, HEADGEAR, UMBRELLAS, SUN UMBRELLAS, WALKINGSTICKS, SEAT-STICKS, WHIPS, RIDING- CROPS AND PARTS
THEREOF; PREPARED FEATHERS AND ARTICLES MADE
THEREWITH; ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS; ARTICLES OF HUMAN HAIR
Description
-64 Footwear, Gaiters and the Like; Parts of such Articles
-65 Headgear and Parts Thereof
-66 Umbrellas, Sun Umbrellas, Walking-sticks, Seat-sticks, Whips, Ridingcrops, and Parts Thereof
-67 Prepared Feathers and Down and Articles Made of Feathers or of
Down; Artificial Flowers; Articles of Human Hair

SECTION - 13 (Chapter 68 TO 70)
SECTION XIII -

ARTICLES OF STONE, PLASTER, CEMENT,
ASBESTOS, MICA OR SIMILAR MATERIALS; CERAMIC
PRODUCTS; GLASS AND GLASSWARE

Description
-68 Articles of Stone, Plaster, Cement, Asbestos, Mica or Similar Materials
-69 Ceramic Products
-70 Glass and Glassware

15 | P a g e

SECTION - 14 (Chapter 71)
SECTION XIV - NATURAL OR CULTURED PEARLS, PRECIOUS OR
SEMI-PRECIOUS STONES, PRECIOUS METALS,
METALS CLAD WITH PRECIOUS METAL, AND
ARTICLES THEREOF; IMITATION JEWELLERY; COIN
Description
-71 Natural or Cultured Pearls, Precious or Semi-precious Stones,
Precious Metals, Metals Clad with Precious Metal, and Articles thereof;
Imitation Jewel

SECTION – 15 (Chapter 72 TO 83)
SECTION XV - BASE METALS AND ARTICLES OF BASE METAL
Description
-72 Iron and Steel
-73 Articles of Iron or Steel
-74 Copper and Articles thereof
-75 Nickel and articles thereof
-76 Aluminium and articles thereof
-77 Reserved for Possible Future use in Harmonised System
-78 Lead and Articles thereof
-79 Zinc and Articles thereof
-80 Tin and Articles Thereof
-81 Other Base Metals; Cermets Articles thereof
-82 Tools, Implements, Cutlery, Spoons and Forks, of Base Metal; Parts
thereof Base Metal
-83 Miscellaneous Articles of Base Metal

SECTION - 16 (Chapter 84 TO 85)
SECTION XVI - MACHINERY AND MECHANICAL APPLIANCES;
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT; PARTS THEREOF;
SOUND RECORDERS AND REPRODUCERS,
TELEVISION IMAGE AND SOUND RECORDERS AND
REPRODUCERS, TELEVISION IMAGE AND SOUND
RECORDERS AND REPRODUCERS, AND PARTS AND
ACCESSORIES OF SUCH ARTICLE
16 | P a g e

Description
-84 Nuclear Reactors, Boilers, Machinery and Mechanical Appliances;
Parts thereof
-85 Electrical Machinery and Equipment and Parts Thereof; Sound
Recorders and Reproducers, Television Image and Sound Recorders
and Reproducers, and Parts and Accessories of Such Articles

SECTION - 17 (Chapter 86 TO 89)
SECTION

XVII

-

VEHICLES,
AIRCRAFT,
TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT

VESSELS

AND

ASSOCIATED

Description
-86 Railway or tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts thereof; railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings and parts thereof;
mechanical (including electro-mechanical) traffic signalling equipment
of all kinds
-87 Vehicles other than Railway or Tramway Rolling-stock, and Parts and
Accessories Thereof
-88 Aircraft, Spacecraft and Parts thereof
-89 Ships, Boats and Floating Structures

SECTION - 18 (Chapter 90 TO 92)
SECTION XVIII - OPTICAL, PHOTOGRAPHIC, CINEMATOGRAPHIC, MEASURING,
CHECKING, PRECISION, MEDICAL OR SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS
AND APPARATUS; CLOCKS AND WATCHES; MUSICAL
INSTRUMENTS; PART AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF
Description
-90 Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking,
precision, medical or surgical instruments and apparatus; parts and
accessories thereof
-91 Clocks and Watches and parts thereof
-92 Musical Instruments Parts and Accessories of such articles

SECTION - 19 (CHAPTER 93)
SECTION XIX - ARMS AND AMMUNITION; PARTS AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF
Description
-93 Arms and Ammunition; Parts and Accessories thereof

SECTION - 20 (Chapter 94 TO 96)
SECTION XX - MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURED ARTICLES
17 | P a g e

Description
-94 Furniture; Bedding, Mattresses, Mattress Supports, Cushions and
similar stuffed furnishings; Lamps and Lighting Fittings, not elsewhere
specified or included; Illuminated signs, Illuminated name-plates and
the like; Prefabricated Building
-95 Toys, Games and Sports Requisites; Parts and Accessories thereof
-96 Miscellaneous Manufactured Articles

SECTION - 21 (Chapter 97 TO 98)
SECTION XXI - WORKS OF ART, COLLECTORS' PIECES AND ANTIQUES
Description
-97 Works of Art, Collectors’ Pieces and Antiques
-98 Project Imports; Laboratory Chemicals; Passengers’ Baggage;
Personal Importations by Air or Post; Ship Stores
SECTION – 22 (Chapter 99)
SECTION XXII - Others
99 - Others

POLICY
Import Policy:
The Indian Trade Classification (ITC)-Harmonized System (HS) classifies goods
into three categories:
Restricted
Canalized
Prohibited
Goods not specified in the above mentioned categories can be freely imported
without any restriction, if the importer has obtained a valid IEC. There is no need to
obtain any import license or permission to import such goods. Most of the goods can
be freely imported in India.
•
•
•

Licensed (Restricted) Items- Restricted items can be imported only after
obtaining an import license from the relevant regional licensing authority. The goods
covered by the license shall be disposed of in the manner specified by the license
authority, which should be clearly indicated in the license itself. The list of restricted
goods is provided in ITC (HS). An import license is valid for 24 months for capital
goods, and 18 months for all other goods
Canalized Items - Canalized goods are items which may only be imported using
specific procedures or methods of transport. The list of canalized goods can be found
in the ITC (HS). Goods in this category can be imported only through canalizing
agencies. The main canalized items are currently petroleum products, bulk
agricultural products, such as grains and vegetable oils, and some pharmaceutical
products.
18 | P a g e

Prohibited Items - these are the goods listed in ITC (HS) which are strictly
prohibited on all import channels in India. These include wild animals, tallow fat and
oils of animal origin, animal rennet, and unprocessed ivory.

Export Policy:
Just like imports, goods can be exported freely if they are not mentioned in
the classification of ITC (HS). Below follows the classification of goods for export:
•

Restricted

•

Prohibited

•

State Trading Enterprise

Restricted Goods - before exporting any restricted goods, the exporter must
first obtain a license explicitly permitting the exporter to do so. The restricted goods
must be exported through a set of procedures/conditions, which are detailed in the
license.
Prohibited Goods - these are the items which cannot be exported at all. The
vast majority of these include wild animals, and animal articles that may carry a risk
of infection.
State Trading Enterprise (STE) - Certain items can be exported only through
designated STEs. The export of such items is subject to the conditions specified in the
EXIM policy.

7) Selection of Markets:
An overseas market should be selected after research covering market size,
competition, quality requirements, payment terms etc. Exporters can also evaluate the
markets based on the export benefits available for few countries under the FTP.
DGCIS data, Export Promotion Councils, Indian Missions abroad, colleagues, friends,
and relatives might be helpful in gathering information. The Demand, Distance, Fright
& Other Expenses, Free Trade Agreements, Accessibility, Etc May be factors to be
considered.

8) Finding Buyers:
Participation in trade fairs, buyer seller meets, exhibitions, B2B portals, web
browsing are an effective tool to find buyers. Export Promotion Councils, Indian
Missions abroad, overseas chambers of commerce can also be helpful. Creating
multilingual Website with product catalogue, price, payment terms and other related
information would also help.

9) Sampling:
Providing customized samples as per the demands of foreign buyers help in
getting export orders. As per FTP 2023, exports of bonafide trade and technical
samples of freely exportable items shall be allowed without any limit.

19 | P a g e

10) Pricing/Costing:
Product pricing is crucial in getting buyers’ attention and promoting sales in
view of international competition. The price should be worked out taking into
consideration all expenses from sampling to realization of export proceeds on the basis
of terms of sale. Incoterms may be understood before finalising price. Goal of
establishing export costing should be to sell maximum quantity at competitive price
with maximum profit margin. Preparing an export costing sheet for every export
product is advisable.

India FTA Engagements
India has signed 13 free trade agreements (FTAs) and 6 preferential trade
agreements (PTA). In the Indian context, the key differences between an FTA and a
PTA are that the FTA is comprehensive across a number of areas and has deeper
commitments while a PTA is confined to trade in goods and seeks only tariff
elimination in terms of a margin of preference (MOP). Moreover, the coverage of a PTA
on goods is also limited as compared to an FTA. Knowledge about concessions given
by the other nations to india in exports and imports will be beneficial to Indian
exporters to utilize that concessions and considerations.

INCOTERMS
Definition:
Incoterms are the selling terms that the buyer and seller of goods both agree
to during international transactions. These rules are accepted by governments and
legal authorities around the world. Understanding Incoterms is a vital part of
International Trade because they clearly state which tasks, costs and risks are
associated with the buyer and the seller.
The Incoterm states when the seller’s costs and risks are transferred onto the
buyer. It’s also important to understand that not all rules apply in all cases. Some
encompass any mode or modes of transport. Transport by all modes of transport
(road, rail, air and sea) covers FCA, CPT, CIP, DAP, DPU (replaces DAT) and DDP.
Sea/Inland waterway transport (Sea) covers FAS, FOB, CFR and CIF.

Role of Incoterms in International Trade:
Incoterms are referred to as International Commercial Terms. They are a set
of rules published by the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), which relate to
International Commercial Law.

According to the ICC, Incoterms rules provide

internationally accepted definitions and rules of interpretation for most common
commercial terms used in contracts for the sale of goods’. While determining the price
of the export products and negotiating the delivery point of goods the knowledge of
incoterms is must.
20 | P a g e

21 | P a g e

An overview of Incoterms 2020 for 11 Terms, 7 for any mode of transport:

22 | P a g e

Rules for any mode or modes of transport:
EXW - Ex-Works or Ex-Warehouse:
“Ex Works” means that the seller delivers when it places the goods at the
disposal of the buyer at the seller’s premises or at another named place (i.e., works
factory, warehouse, etc.). The seller does not need to load the goods on any collecting
vehicle, nor does it need to clear the goods for export, where such clearance is
applicable.

FCA - Free Carrier:
“Free Carrier” means that the seller delivers the goods to the carrier or
another person nominated by the buyer at the seller’s premises or another named
place. The parties are well advised to specify as clearly as possible the point within the
named place of delivery, as the risk passes to the buyer at that point.

CPT - Carriage Paid To:
“Carriage Paid To” means that the seller delivers the goods to the carrier or
another person nominated by the seller at an agreed place (if any such place is agreed
between parties) and that the seller must contract for and pay the costs of carriage
necessary to bring the goods to the named place of destination.

CIP - Carriage and Insurance Paid To:
“Carriage and Insurance Paid to” means that the seller delivers the goods to
the carrier or another person nominated by the seller at an agreed place (if any such
place is agreed between parties) and that the seller must contract for and pay the
costs of carriage necessary to bring the goods to the named place of destination.
‘The seller also contracts for insurance cover against the buyer’s risk of loss of
or damage to the goods during the carriage. The buyer should note that under CIP the
seller is required to obtain insurance only on minimum cover. Should the buyer wish
to have more insurance protection, it will need either to agree as much expressly with
the seller or to make its own extra insurance arrangements.”

DAP - Delivered At Place:
“Delivered at Place” means that the seller delivers when the goods are placed
at the disposal of the buyer on the arriving means of transport ready for unloading at
the named place of destination. The seller bears all risks involved in bringing the
goods to the named place.

DPU - Delivered At Place Unloaded:
“Delivered At Place Unloaded” means that the seller delivers when the goods,
once unloaded, are placed at the disposal of the buyer at a named place of destination.
The seller bears all risks involved in bringing the goods to, and unloading them at the
named place of destination.
23 | P a g e

DDP - Delivered Duty Paid:
“Delivered Duty Paid” means that the seller delivers the goods when the goods
are placed at the disposal of the buyer, cleared for import on the arriving means of
transport ready for unloading at the named place of destination. The seller bears all
the costs and risks involved in bringing the goods to the place of destination and has
an obligation to clear the goods not only for export but also for import, to pay any duty
for both export and import and to carry out all customs formalities.

Rules for sea and inland waterway transport:
FAS - Free Alongside Ship:
“Free Alongside Ship” means that the seller delivers when the goods are
placed alongside the vessel (e.g., on a quay or a barge) nominated by the buyer at the
named port of shipment. The risk of loss of or damage to the goods passes when the
goods are alongside the ship, and the buyer bears all costs from that moment
onwards.

FOB - Free On Board:
“Free On Board” means that the seller delivers the goods on board the vessel
nominated by the buyer at the named port of shipment or procures the goods already
so delivered. The risk of loss of or damage to the goods passes when the goods are on
board the vessel, and the buyer bears all costs from that moment onwards.

CFR - Cost and Freight:
“Cost and Freight” means that the seller delivers the goods on board the
vessel or procures the goods already so delivered. The risk of loss of or damage to the
goods passes when the goods are on board the vessel. The seller must contract for and
pay the costs and freight necessary to bring the goods to the named port of
destination.

CIF - Cost, Insurance and Freight:
“Cost, Insurance and Freight” means that the seller delivers the goods on
board the vessel or procures the goods already so delivered. The risk of loss of or
damage to the goods passes when the goods are on board the vessel. The seller must
contract for and pay the costs and freight necessary to bring the goods to the named
port of destination.
‘The seller also contracts for insurance cover against the buyer’s risk of loss of
or damage to the goods during the carriage. The buyer should note that under CIF the
seller is required to obtain insurance only on minimum cover. Should the buyer wish
to have more insurance protection, it will need either to agree as much expressly with
the seller or to make its own extra insurance arrangements.”
24 | P a g e

11) Negotiation with Buyers:
After determining the buyer’s interest in the product, future prospects and
continuity in business, demand for giving reasonable allowance/discount in price may
be considered.

12) Covering Risks through ECGC:
International trade involves payment risks due to buyer/ Country
insolvency. These risks can be covered by an appropriate Policy from Export Credit
Guarantee Corporation Ltd (ECGC). Where the buyer is placing order without making
advance payment or opening letter of Credit, it is advisable to procure credit limit on
the foreign buyer from ECGC to protect against risk of non-payment.(To know more
about ECGC – Go to Organisations Associated with Content).

Processing an Export Order:
i. Confirmation of order:
On receiving an export order, it should be examined carefully in respect of
items, specification, payment conditions, packaging, delivery schedule, etc. and then
the order should be confirmed. Accordingly, the exporter may enter into a formal
contract with the overseas buyer.

ii. Procurement of Goods:
After confirmation of the export order, immediate steps may be taken for
procurement/manufacture of the goods meant for export. It should be remembered
that the order has been obtained with much efforts and competition so the
procurement should also be strictly as per buyer’s requirement.

iii. Quality Control:
In today’s competitive era, it is important to be strict quality conscious about
the export goods. Some products like food and agriculture, fishery, certain chemicals,
etc. are subject to compulsory pre-shipment inspection. Foreign buyers may also lay
down their own standards/specifications and insist upon inspection by their own
nominated agencies. Maintaining high quality is necessary to sustain in export
business.

iv. Finance:
Exporters are eligible to obtain pre-shipment and post-shipment finance from
Commercial Banks at concessional interest rates to complete the export transaction.
Packing Credit advance in pre-shipment stage is granted to new exporters against
lodgement of L/C or confirmed order for 180 days to meet working capital
requirements for purchase of raw material/finished goods, labour expenses, packing,
25 | P a g e

transporting, etc. Normally Banks give 75% to 90% advances of the value of the order
keeping the balance as margin. Banks adjust the packing credit advance from the
proceeds of export bills negotiated, purchased or discounted.

Post Shipment finance is given to exporters normally upto 90% of the Invoice
value for normal transit period and in cases of issuance export bills up to notional due
date. The maximum period for post-shipment advances is 180 days from the date of
shipment. Advances granted by Banks are adjusted by realization of the sale proceeds
of the export bills. In case export bill becomes overdue Banks will charge commercial
lending rate of interest.

v. Labelling, Packaging, Packing and Marking:
The export goods should be labelled, packaged and packed strictly as per the
buyer’s specific instructions. Good packaging delivers and presents the goods in top
condition and in attractive way. Similarly, good packing helps easy handling,
maximum loading, reducing shipping costs and to ensuring safety and standard of the
cargo. Marking such as address, package number, port and place of destination,
weight, handling instructions, etc. provides identification and information of cargo
packed.

PACKAGING
Introduction:
An important stage after manufacturing of goods or their procurement is their
preparation for shipment which involves packaging and labelling of goods to be
exported. Proper packaging and labelling not only makes the final product look
attractive but also save a huge amount of money by saving the product from wrong
handling the export process.
It is essential for exporters to keep four potential problems in mind when
designing a shipping crate for international shipping: breakage, moisture, leakage,
pilferage, and excessive weight. Exporters should take into account the demands of
international shipping when designing their export shipping crates.

Packaging:
The primary role of packaging is to contain, protect and preserve a product as
well as aid in its handling and final presentation. Packaging also refers to the process
of design, evaluation, and production of packages. The packaging can be done within
the export company or the job can be assigned to an outside packaging company.
Packaging provides following benefits to the goods to be exported:

26 | P a g e



Physical Protection – Packaging provides protection against shock, vibration,
temperature, moisture and dust.



Containment or agglomeration – Packaging provides agglomeration of small
objects into one package for reason of efficiency and cost factor. For example it
is better to put 1000 pencils in one box rather than putting each pencil in
separate 1000 boxes.



Marketing: Proper and attractive packaging play an important role in
encouraging a potential buyer.



Convenience - Packages can have features which add convenience in
distribution, handling, display, sale, opening, use, and reuse.



Security - Packaging can play an important role in reducing the security risks
of shipment. It also provides authentication seals to indicate that the package
and contents are not counterfeit. Packages also can include anti-theft devices,
such as dye-packs, RFID tags, or electronic article surveillance tags, that can be
activated or detected by devices at exit points and require specialized tools to
deactivate. Using packaging in this way is a means of loss prevention.

Types of Packaging1 Boxes and CratesBoxes for packaging are solid and covered on all sides so that items remain
secure. On the other hand, crates typically have their sides open, but their tops and
bottoms solid.

2 Paperboard boxesTo produce it, fibrous materials from wood or recycled waste paper are turned
into pulp and then bleached. There are several grades of cardboard packaging, each of
which is suitable for different packaging requirements. It is lightweight yet strong.

3 Corrugated boxesIt is commonly known as cardboard boxes. There are also different types of
corrugated boxes depending on their durability and strength.

4 Plastic boxesIt is important to use airtight plastic packaging containers in order to
preserve food quality and eliminate contamination. Additionally, plastic packaging
does not break easily and can be stored with food in extreme conditions.

27 | P a g e

5 Clipboard packagingChipboard packaging is a cost-effective packaging option for products from
industries such as electronics, medical, food, beverages, and cosmetic. Chipboard is
made of reclaimed paper stock and can easily be cut, folded, and formed.

6 Poly bag –
This is one of the most common types of packaging and it can contain various
products including food, flowers, waste, chemicals, magazines, etc. It is structurally
simple to make poly bags, making it possible to completely customize the design, style,
and size, but remain cost-effective. In addition, poly bags can also be recycled,
depending on the construction. Poly bags are durable yet lightweight, flexible and
reusable.

7 Bottles and JarsBottles and jars offer outstanding product protection when they are stacked
or transported. They come in a variety of materials, including: Glass, Plastic, Tin and
Ceramic. You can find high-quality containers for essential oils, candles, food, etc.
Generally, packaging refers to the act of wrapping or bottling products to
make them safe from damage during transportation and storage. It keeps a product
safe and marketable while also identifying, describing, and promoting it. Packaging
also creates a preference for a product.

Labelling:
Like packaging, labelling should also be done with extra care. It is also
important for an exporter to be familiar with all kinds of sign and symbols and should
also maintain all the nationally and internationally standards while using these
symbols. Labelling should be in English, and words indicating country of origin should
be as large and as prominent as any other English wording on the package or label.

Labelling on product provides the following important information:


Shipper's mark



Country of origin



Weight marking (in pounds and in kilograms)



Number of packages and size of cases (in inches and centimetres)



Handling marks (international pictorial symbols)



Cautionary markings, such as "This Side Up."



Port of entry



Labels for hazardous materials

28 | P a g e

Labelling of a product also provides information like how to use, transport,
recycle, or dispose of the package or product. With pharmaceuticals, food, medical,
and chemical products, some types of information are required by governments.
It is better to choose a fast dyes for labelling purpose. Only fast dyes should
be used for labelling. Essential data should be in black and subsidiary data in a less
conspicuous colour; red and orange and so on. For food packed in sacks, only
harmless dyes should be employed, and the dye should not come through the packing
in such a way as to affect the goods.

vi. Insurance:
Marine insurance policies cover risks of loss or damage to the goods during
the while the goods are in transit. Generally in CIF contract the exporters arrange the
insurance whereas for C&F and FOB contract the buyers obtain insurance policy.

vii. Delivery:
It is important feature of export and the exporter must adhere the delivery
schedule. Planning should be there to let nothing stand in the way of fast and efficient
delivery.
Realisation of Export Proceeds: On receiving the documentary bill of exchange, the
importer releases payment in case of sight draft or accepts the usance draft
undertaking to pay on maturity of the bill of exchange. The exporter’s bank receives
the payment through importer's bank and is credited to exporter's account.
Letter of Credit: The respective buyer’s bank issues the Letter of Credit to confirm
the payment to the exporter on the committed date, in case the buyer gets late in
paying the bills. It is an essential document which is guaranteed by the bank in order
to honour the buyer purchase order.

viii. Customs Procedures:
It is necessary to obtain PAN based Business Identification Number (BIN)
from the Customs prior to filing of shipping bill for clearance of export good and open
a current account in the designated bank for crediting of any drawback amount and
the same has to be registered on the system.
In case of Non-EDI, the shipping bills or bills of export are required to be filled
in the format as prescribed in the Shipping Bill and Bill of Export (Form) regulations,
1991. An exporter need to apply different forms of shipping bill/ bill of export for
export of duty free goods, export of dutiable goods and export under drawback etc.
Under EDI System, declarations in prescribed format are to be filed through
the Service Centres of Customs. A checklist is generated for verification of data by the
exporter/CHA. After verification, the data is submitted to the System by the Service
Centre operator and the System generates a Shipping Bill Number, which is endorsed
29 | P a g e

on the printed checklist and returned to the exporter/CHA. In most of the cases, a
Shipping Bill is processed by the system on the basis of declarations made by the
exporters without any human intervention. Where the Appraiser Dock (export) orders
for samples to be drawn and tested, the Customs Officer may proceed to draw two
samples from the consignment and enter the particulars thereof along with details of
the testing agency in the ICES/E system.
Any correction/amendments in the check list generated after filing of
declaration can be made at the service centre, if the documents have not yet been
submitted in the system and the shipping bill number has not been generated. In
situations, where corrections are required to be made after the generation of the
shipping bill number or after the goods have been brought into the Export Dock,
amendments is carried out in the following manners.
•

The goods have not yet been allowed "let export" amendments may be permitted
by the Assistant Commissioner (Exports).

•

Where the "Let Export" order has already been given, amendments may be
permitted only by the Additional/Joint Commissioner, Custom House, in charge
of export section.

In both the cases, after the permission for amendments has been granted,
the Assistant Commissioner / Deputy Commissioner (Export) may approve the
amendments on the system on behalf of the Additional /Joint Commissioner. Where
the print out of the Shipping Bill has already been generated, the exporter may first
surrender all copies of the shipping bill to the Dock Appraiser for cancellation before
amendment is approved on the system.

ix. Customs House Agents:
Exporters may avail services of Customs House Agents licensed by the
Commissioner of Customs. They are professionals and facilitate work connected with
clearance of cargo from Customs.

x. Documentation:
FTP 2023 describes the following mandatory documents for import and export.
•

Bill of Lading/ Airway bill

•
•

Commercial invoice cum packing list
shipping bill/ bill of export/ bill of entry (for imports)
(Other documents like certificate of origin, inspection certificate etc
may be required as per the case.)

xi. Submission of Documents to Bank:
After shipment, it is obligatory to present the documents to the Bank within 21
days for onward dispatch to the foreign Bank for arranging payment. Documents
should be drawn under Collection/Purchase/Negotiation under L/C as the case may
be, along with the following documents:
30 | P a g e

•

Bill of Exchange

•

Letter of Credit (if shipment is under L/C)

•

Invoice

•

Packing List

•

Airway Bill/Bill of Lading

•

Declaration under Foreign Exchange

•

Certificate of Origin/GSP

•

Inspection Certificate, wherever necessary

•

Any other document as required in the L/C or by the buyer or statutorily.

EXPORT DOCUMENTATION: EXPORT FROM INDIA
Export from India demands documents depending upon the destination where
the product needs to be exported and also the kind of product that is about to get
exported. Different countries require different certifications for different product range.
While these documents not just give insight regarding the item and its destination port
but on the other hand, they are also utilized with the end goal of tax assessment and
quality control investigation certification.
Here is a list of documents that you need to furnish while exporting overseas
from India.

1. Bill of Landing:
Bill of landing is one of the essential documents in charge of export bound
cargos. It is issued by the carrier to represent a contract and a receipt between the
shipper and the carrier. Under this Bill, the carrier acknowledges that the goods have
been received from the exporter in good condition and is ready to ship.

2. Commercial Invoice cum Packing List:
Recently under Government guidelines two documents, Packing List and
Commercial Invoice, required by Customs have been merged into one document.
I.

II.

Commercial Invoice: It is a necessary document in export. Once the products
are good to go, a Commercial Invoice is prepared and submitted to the Customs
by the exporter. The customs signature is required before the shipment begins.
Packing List: This document is required when the cargo contains more than
one product. A proper packaging list is prepared, listing the distinct items,
which needs to be export.

31 | P a g e

3. Shipping Bill or Bill of Export:
Shipping Bill is a customs document needed to obtain clearance for exports
from customs. It is issued by Indian Customs Electronic Gateway (ICEGATE) which
provides electronic filing of Shipping Bills. An exporter cannot ship the goods unless
and until he files the Shipping Bill as it a mandatory document.

4. Proforma Invoice:
A proforma invoice is a bill which is required when you need advance
payment from your committed customers. A proforma invoice includes details about
the product, price, delivery, payment transactions, etc. It is an agreement between the
buyer and the seller on the basis of trust.

5. Export Order/Purchase Order:
After the Proforma Invoice is issued, the buyer confirms the order through
Purchase Order (PO) with the exporter. The purchase order includes details from the
buyer’s side specifying goods details such as cost, currency, shipping details and their
requirements.

6. Certificate of Origin:
The Certificate of Origin (COO) is a special document which provides the
information such as the country of the origin of the goods; that is the place where
goods have been manufactured. It is an affidavit attached to the commercial invoice.
The COO is generated for each item in the parcel.

7. Bill of exchange (BE):
A written order which tells buyer to pay the amount mentioned by the
exporter is known as the Bill of Exchange. It is generated by the exporter to inform the
importer about the payment.

8. Letter of Credit:
The respective buyer’s bank issues the Letter of Credit to confirm the
payment to the exporter on the committed date, in case the buyer gets late in paying
the bills. It is an essential document which is guaranteed by the bank in order to
honour the buyer purchase order.

9. Inspection/Quality check:
An importer can ask for quality investigation before the shipment of the
goods. Inspecting the product’s quality, examining, and testing products comes under
this bill. The buyer can assist on verifying the packaging parameters as well. The
exporter should get ready the quality inspection certificate while shipping products.
32 | P a g e

10. Phyto-sanitary certificates and fumigation certificates:
The Phyto-sanitary certificate and the fumigation certificate are demanded by
the importer in regard to quality check of products under international quality
standards and norms. The Phyto-sanitary certificate is compulsory while shipping
agricultural commodities from India. It is one of the mandatory document and exports
should regulate this certificate when exporting.
All businesses and organizations are expected to be agreeable with the nation
regulations and guidelines to maintain a worldwide business. By meeting the various
requirements through documentation and certificates you can scale up your business
in the international markets and reach millions of customers out there.

MERCHANT EXPORTS / THIRD PARTY EXPORTS
Introduction:
Merchant export is a popular term under EXIM policy and is equally
important to the manufacturer-exporter. Merchant exports generate the foreign
exchange for the Country like normal exports and is mainly engaged in export of
goods and not services. The person who is engaged in the merchant export is called
as 'Merchant exporter'. Merchant exporters do not have their own manufacturing
facilities; instead they buy goods from the manufacturer-exporter in Domestic Tariff
Area (DTA) to execute exports to overseas customers. Merchant-exporters are
instrumental in a boosting of country's exports, especially exports from MSME and
small manufacturers.

Definition:
As per Foreign Trade policy (2023), Para 11.33 "Merchant Exporter" means a
person engaged in trading activity and exporting or intending to export goods.
Merchant Exporters buy goods from the Indian manufacturers and export
them abroad. They may not have their own manufacturing unit or processing facility
but sell and buy on their own account. They usually have a system of gathering
market information and keep a close watch on market trends. The nature of their
business makes it possible for them to assess the marketability of products and the
prospects of their success.


Nature of Work:
Merchant exporters work just how a manufacturer exporter works, except
that they do not produce the goods. This means that the merchant exporters do not
have to set up manufacturing units. Instead, these exporters identify suppliers who
manufacture the goods and then sell the same to their potential overseas buyers.
After building a network of suppliers, merchant exporters look for buyers by
adopting various marketing strategies like email and social media campaigns,
developing an informative website, etc. The merchant exporter acquires leads and
subsequently more business through these efforts.
33 | P a g e

Once the sales order is received, the merchant exporter asks his supplier to
supply the necessary quantity of goods, which then the exporter ships to the client.
The goods bear the name of the merchant exporter and not the original supplier.
There are several merchant exporters that operate in India and contribute richly to
the country’s exports. Governments have, time and again, introduced multiple schemes and
incentives to promote this kind of exports. A merchant exporter has to register at the GST
portal to avail of the benefits of all the incentives

Merchanting Trade Reform:
 Provisions for merchanting trade introduced under FTP 2023.
 To boost merchanting activities from India – where goods do not touch Indian
border. The merchant buys from one country and supplies to another country
while based in India.
 Expected to facilitate merchanting trade from India making India a trade hub.

Supporting Manufacture
Supporting Manufacturer is one who manufactures goods/products or any
part/accessories/components of a good/ product for a merchant exporter or a
manufacturer exporter under a specific Authorisation.
Supporting Manufacturer for the EPCG Scheme shall be one in whose
premises/ factory Capital Goods imported/ procured under EPCG Authorisation is
installed.

Benefits for Supporting Manufacturers:
For any benefit to accrue to the supporting manufacturer (as defined in Para
11.59 of FTP), the names of both supporting manufacturer as well as the merchant
exporter must figure in the concerned export documents, especially in Tax Invoice /
Shipping Bill / Bill of Export/ Airway Bill.

E-COMMERCE
Objective:
The objective of DGFT is to provide a framework for cross-border trade of
goods and services from India in the digital economy and the promotion of eCommerce and other emerging channels of exports from India

E-Commerce Exports of Goods and Services:
Export of goods where selling is through the internet on an e-Commerce
platform, the payment for which shall be done through international credit or debit
cards, or other authorised electronic payment channels and as specified by the RBI
from time to time.

34 | P a g e

The necessary documents are


Identity proof like Aadhar card, passport or driving license



Business address proof



International transaction-enabled credit card



PAN card from the Income Tax Department of India



IEC (Import-Export Code).



Details about the export products with photographs

Export through Courier Service/Post:
Exports through a registered courier service/Foreign Post Office is permitted
as per Notification(s) issued under Customs Act, 1962. However, exportability of such
items shall be regulated in accordance with FTP/Export Policy in ITC (HS) as notified.
The value limit for exports through courier service shall be Rs. 10,00,000 per
consignment.
PROMOTION OF E-COMMERCE EXPORTS:

Handholding and outreach to promote e-Commerce Exports:
I.

The Niryat Bandhu Scheme (NBS) as defined under Chapter 1 of the Policy shall
have a component for the promotion of e-Commerce and other emerging channels
of exports. Under the given NBS component, DGFT shall organise outreach
activities/workshops in partnership with Customs Authorities, Department of
Post, ‘Industry Partners’ and ‘Knowledge Partners’ for promotion of e-Commerce
exports. Besides outreach/ workshops, specific focus may be on creation of
electronic content as well.

II.

In addition to increasing awareness on e-Commerce related rules and processes,
actions may be undertaken under the said NBS component for capacity building
and skill development for promotion of e-Commerce exports, in partnership with
Customs Authorities, Department of Post, ‘Industry Partners’ or the ‘Knowledge
Partners’.

E-COMMERCE EXPORT HUBS (ECEHs):
Objective:
The objective is to establish designated areas as E-Commerce Export Hubs
(hereafter called “ECEH”), which would act as a centre for favourable business
infrastructure and facilities for Cross Border E-Commerce activities.

Creation of ECEH:
I.

The ECEH shall ordinarily be setup through private initiative. It may also be
setup in Public-Private- Partnership (PPP) mode in partnership with the State
governments/Central government. Request for approval of an ECEH proposed
shall be submitted to the notified committee to be constituted by DGFT.

35 | P a g e

II.

Existing facility with the required infrastructure may also apply to be designated
as ECEH.

Nature of ECEH Operations:
I.

ECEH will function to achieve agglomeration benefits for e-commerce exporters.
The ECEH may provide for storage (including cold storage facilities), packaging,
labelling, certification & testing and other common facilities for the purposes of
export.

II.

The ECEH shall also provide for dedicated logistics infrastructure for connecting
to and leveraging the services of the nearest Logistics hub(s).

III.

All goods, including SCOMET and Restricted goods (subject to suitable
compliance of regulations and conditions) and except goods which are
prohibited or otherwise disallowed, may be handled at ECEH.

IV.

Capital goods brought to a ECEH shall be utilized only for activities as
mentioned at (i) above on payment of the duties and taxes, as applicable, in
terms of extant laws.

Entitlement under ECEHs:
ECEH may be provided financial assistance under MAI scheme, for eCommerce export promotion projects for marketing, capacity building and
technological services such as imaging, cataloguing, product video creation of eCommerce Goods.
PROMOTION OF E-COMMERCE EXPORTS THROUGH POSTAL ROUTE:
Dak Niryat Kendras:
Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras shall be operationalised throughout the country to
work in a hub-and-spoke model with Foreign Post Offices (FPOs) to facilitate crossborder e-Commerce and to enable artisans, weavers, craftsmen, MSMEs in the
hinterland and land-locked regions to reach international markets.

36 | P a g e

The necessary documents required for E-Commerce:

1. Identity proof like Aadhar card, passport or driving license
2. Business address proof
3. International transaction-enabled credit card
4. PAN card from the Income Tax Department of India
5. IEC (Import-Export Code).
6. Details about the export products with photographs
Way Forward:
The policy is upbeat about e-commerce exports with the government
assuming a potential of annual exports growing to about $200-300 billion by 2030
from about $5-10 billion at present.
All FTP benefits are to be extended to e-commerce exports. An interministerial committee comprising officials from the Department of Revenue,
Department of Post, and the DGFT has been set up to come up with appropriate
guidelines to increase e-commerce exports.
In a major concession, the value limit for exports through courier service has
been doubled to ₹10 lakhs per consignment.
The FTP also announced the creation of designated zones with warehousing
facilities to help e-commerce aggregators with easy stocking, customs clearance, and
returns processing.

FREIGHT FORWARDERS
Introduction:
Freight forwarders play an important role in the transportation industry by
helping companies streamline the process of shipping goods. Importing and exporting
can quickly become costly and time-consuming for manufacturers with bulk shipping
needs, and freight forwarders can help companies decrease costs and increase
operation efficiency.

Definition:
A freight forwarder is a company that serves as an intermediary between
transportation companies that import and export goods and the businesses that need
them. Freight forwarders manage every aspect of the transportation process, from
storing goods before shipment to ensuring they make it through customs. They don't
handle the movement of the goods themselves, but they establish relationships with
the companies that do so they can plan each step of every shipment on a client's
behalf. Freight forwarders work with transportation companies that ship products by
road, rail, water and air.

37 | P a g e

Stages of Freight Forwarding:
Steps involved in forwarding freight:

1. Export haulage:
Freight forwarders call the first stage of the process export haulage. This
occurs when a transportation company takes products from a company to the freight
forwarders warehouse. Trucks often handle this step, but the mode of transportation
depends on the material the company ships and the distance to the warehouse. It
could take a few hours or days for the shipment to arrive.

2. Export customs clearance:
Before an international shipment can enter another country, customs agents
in the product's country of origin must approve their departure. Agents may check
both the product and the associated paperwork to make sure they correlate. They also
validate the safety and legality of the product before allowing it to leave the country.
Many freight forwarders hire customs brokers to handle this step of the process.

3. Items checkpoint:
Items checkpoint, also known as origin handling, occurs when the receiving
team unloads the items into the warehouse. They inspect the products to make sure
they arrived without damage and confirm that they match the booking documents for
the order. The freight forwarding team also checks to ensure that the target location
will accept the shipment. Certain items have restrictions, especially if they're going to
a country other than their country of origin.
These items may include:
Flammable liquids: Gasoline, lighter fluid, acetone and even perfume have strict
regulations for shipment due to their potential hazards.
Drugs: Pharmaceuticals often require climate-controlled transportation methods, and
freight forwarders don't ship recreational drugs.
Alcohol: Alcohol laws vary by state and country, so freight forwarders have specific
regulations regarding their shipment.
Dangerous items: Products such as knives and other sharp objects can present a
risk to package handlers.
Perishable items: Fresh food and other perishables require express shipment to
ensure they arrive in optimal condition.

4. Import customs clearance:
When the shipment reaches its country of destination, authorities check the
paperwork provided by freight forwarders to confirm that it matches the product. They
also ensure that the product meets the legal requirements for entry into the country.
38 | P a g e

Import customs agents sometimes impose fees, which the freight forwarder covers for
the shipper and bills them for later.

5. Destination arrival and handling:
After the shipment clears import customs, a transportation company arranged
by the freight forwarders prepares the product for shipment to its destination. They
receive the paperwork for the shipment, which may include:






Invoices
Bill of Lading certificate
Export packing list, license and declaration document
Certificate of origin
Inspection certificate

After completing an inspection of the product, they load it for transport and take it to
the import warehouse.

6. Import haulage:
Freight forwarders call the last stage of the process import haulage. This step
takes place when the product arrives at the final destination from the import
warehouse. Like export haulage, freight forwarders may choose one or more types of
transport based on the product and the distance between the warehouse and the
destination. Mileage and transportation mode determine how long the import haulage
takes, but the recipient usually receives their shipment anywhere from hours after it
leaves the warehouse to a few days later.

CONTAINERISED AND NON CONTAINERISED CARGO
Containers are storage units used to move products from one location to
another without damaging them or other products within the consignment. These
containers are reusable that can withstand the challenges posed during the transit.
Shipping containers help reduce the cost of transportation to a great extent, making it
possible to have long-distance trade. The introduction of shipping containers had
made a considerable impact on the globalization of trade and businesses.
Different types of containers are used in domestic and international trade to
move cargo from one location to another. Some types of containers are Standard Dry
Containers, Open Top Containers, High cube Containers, Refrigerated Containers
(Reefer Containers), GOH Containers (Garments on hanger containers), Open Side
Containers, Tank Containers , Half height Containers, Ventilated Containers, Car
Carrier Containers, Hard top Containers, Insulated Containers, Tunnel Containers,
Platform Containers, Flat rack Containers etc.

39 | P a g e

1. Dry cargo shipping containers:
A dry cargo container is normally airtight, effectively preventing any outside
element from damaging the goods that are shipped.
These standard dry cargo containers are completely sealed off and water
resistant. Standard shipping containers are used for most of the cargo movement
domestically and internationally for almost all dry goods, boxes, pallets, sacks, barrels
etc. Most of these standard dry shipping cargo containers are manufactured with good
plywood flooring. These containers are manufactured in accordance with ISO
standard, in such way to transfer from different modes of transport like trucks,ships,
trains etc. one another. The quality of most of containers are inspected and approved
by the classification society.

Use of standard dry container:
Standard dry containers are used to transport goods by road, rail or water.
Mainly two types of standard dry containers are there, 20’ and 40’ which is suitable
for most types of cargo. 45’ dry containers are also available to transport lengthy
cargoes. Almost all cargo containers are built in accordance with the specification
requirements of TIR/CCC agreements and International Convention of Safe
Containers. Lashing rings are available on the inner side of most of containers. Anticorrosive steel plate used in the container can minimize rusting.
The payload details are indicated on side or near the opening door of dry
containers. However, the rules and regulations on maximum weight conditions may
differ from country to country and state to state.
Compared to other type of containers, dry containers are less expensive, as
there are no additional special requirements.
2. Open Top Containers:
All types of general cargo (dry cargo) can be transported in Open Top
Containers. Normally the wall Open Top containers are manufactured in steel.
However, the floors are made with wood.

Use of open top container:
Open Top Containers are used to transport over height or over lengthy cargo
or both. In open top containers, packing and unpacking is easy by crane or crab. For
the purpose of flexibility to load and unload, open containers have end doors.
Oversized cargo such as machinery, timber, steel, scrap metals etc. can be loaded
easily from the top in an open top container. Since the container doors can be
removed, stuffing and de stuffing of goods make easier. The metal beam above the
door can be removed to the right or left and can also be dismantled from the
container.
Top side of open top containers is covered with a removable, weatherproof
tarpaulin that can be secured with ropes. The top of open top containers do not have
solid roof. Lashing rings at the inside base of the container are used to secure and
prevent shifting of cargo during movement.
40 | P a g e

3. High Cube Containers:
High cube containers are almost similar to other cargo containers except
height. Compared to other standard containers, high cube containers are taller. The
approximate height of high cube containers is 2896mm (9feet 6 inches) where as
approximate height of other container 2591mm (8 feet 6 inches). High cube containers
are available in 40’ long commonly and 45’ long rarely. High cube containers are
manufactured with 14 gauge corrugated steel panels with double doors on one end. In
order to bear loads, lashing rings are mounted on front top end rail and bottom cross
member and corner posts of high cube containers. For easy transportation, gooseneck
tunnels at each end are fixed in a 40’ high cube Container.

Use of high cube containers:
The height of high cube containers is 1’ (one feet) additional than other
standard containers. So over height cargo up to that level can be shipped out in high
cube containers. Apart from that, high cube containers are suitable to move light
weight cargo, whose volume high.
4. Refrigerated Containers:
Electrical power supply is connected to the refrigeration unit which is fitted in
the reefer container. The refrigeration unit is arranged in such a way that the external
dimensions of the container meet ISO standards and thus fit into the container ship
cell guides.

Use of Reefer container:
Reefer containers are used to transport goods where temperature conditions
to be controlled. Temperature sensitive cargo such as vegetables, fruits, meat, dairy
products etc. are transported in reefer container generally.
When a reefer container is moved by road, a power generator run by fuel is
connected with trailer carrying reefer container. This electric power generator supports
reefer container to maintain temperature. A capacity of up to 25 degree Celsius
temperature (plus or minus) can be controlled by a reefer container. Special superfreeze reefers can keep goods frozen at temperatures as low as -60 degrees C. The
temperature display is attached to the outside of the refrigeration unit, so that
operation of the unit may be checked at any time.
In order to remove heat generated by refrigerator unit, some of the
refrigerated containers have water cooling system which is helpful where no adequate
ventilation available, especially below deck on vessel. Since water cooling
arrangements are expensive, the method of ventilation arrangements to remove heat is
adopted widely.

41 | P a g e

5. Garments on Hanger container (GOH container):
GOH containers are available in 20’ and 40’. In some countries, Garments On
Hanger Containers (GOH containers) also known as hangtainers. The GOH containers
are available as dry cargo container, reefer container etc. as per the requirements of
apparel shipper.

Use of Garment on Hanger Container (GOH container):
In GOH containers, (Garments On Hanger Containers), arrangements to use
string or bar or combination of string and bar are available. So, Garments On Hanger
containers are flexible, greater loading capacity and minimizing transportation and
handling costs. GOH containers (hangtainers) are useful mainly for apparel exporters
who can save a good amount of time, labor and money. Garment On Hanger
containers are connected with racks and poles by screws and nuts so as to enable the
garments to be loaded safely. The clothing cover made of plastic covers inner sides and
dryer hanged on every pole which is dustproof.
The systematic arrangements of horizontal poles on the roof of GOH
containers help to load maximum volume of garments. The garments can be directly
hanged by using hooks as GOH container poles hangs buckles, nylon straps or ropes.
6. Open Side Container:
An Open sided container has two sets of double door at the lengthy side. Such
two doors are arranged to open the entire length of the container with complete access
to the container for loading and unloading. However, in exceptional cases, three doors
open sided container is also manufactured to facilitate customers to meet their
requirements. The side doors are manufactured to open either an eight feet opening or
a twenty feet opening for a 20’ container as per requirements.
The doors of open sided container are made from flat steel panels instead of
heavier corrugated steel which is compatible with storage use, as the doors are opened
and closed on a regular basis. The security lock box over the padlock provides better
protection. The rubber seals fitted at each door opening locations help for not entering
water or moisture in to the container.
The major advantage of open side container is that the oversized equipment
can be fit. Another advantage of an open sided container is that the amount of space
can be utilized to its maximum. Apart from that, the stuffing and de stuffing are faster
than other types of container. The bigger size of goods can be easily fit in to a open
side container unlike other standard container. Another benefit of an open side
container is that the sorting of goods can be easily done without offloading all items in
the container.
7. Double Door Containers :
Double Door Containers are a modified version of the Standard General
Purpose Containers with doors at both short ends. When both the doors are opened,
these containers resemble a tunnel and hence, also called Tunnel Containers or
Tunnel-tainer. These containers are built from Aluminum or Steel. They are a good
42 | P a g e

choice for quick loading, unloading, and sorting of goods. These containers can be
repurposed as general-purpose Dry Containers by closing one of the doors
permanently.
8. Tanker Container:
Tanker containers are also manufactured as per international standards by
maintaining quality, safety and environment issues. Each hazardous chemical
package has to be mentioned UN number, T code with table, tank type etc. Tank
container pressure vessels are also manufactured with or with non ISO measures.

Use of Tank Containers:
Tank containers are normally used to transport liquid products, powders and
gas both hazardous and non hazardous products.
Tank containers are made of stainless steel with a protective layer of
aluminium and polyurethane. The capacity of a fuel tank container varies from
27000 liters to 40000 liters.

Features of an ISO Tank Container:
Most of the tank containers are manufactured as per ISO standard. The Air
net Inlet valve fixed to the top of the tank and used as a pressure device during
loading and a recovery device during loading. Three closure in a typically tank
container protect from leakage of product. The pressure testing is done before loading
to make sure about leakage and confirm all valves are operational. Pressure relief
valve fitted on tank protects the tank against excess pressure or vacuum. A metal
gauze fitted over the SRV(s) when carrying flammable products permits to be expelled
but stops flash back. Dimensioned frames fabricated from the tensile carbon steel and
comply with ISO dimension.
Heating system makes the tanks useful for heat sensitive products. The outer
skin around the shell protects the insulation from water which is called Cladding
which is made of glass reinforced plastic(GRP) or aluminium. Man lid located on the
top of the tank is used to enter the tank for internal inspection. Every tanker
container is identified by its unique 4 alpha and 6 numerical number. The seven digit
check digit is derived from formula using the tank number. The temperature gauge
fitted to the rear of the tank provides an indicative reading of temperature of the
product. The ladder and top walkways of a tank container makes easier and safer for
access to the the top of tank container. The earth lug (ground lug) connection of a
tanker container supports ground (earth) which helps at the time of loading and
unloading.
9. Half Height Containers:
Half Height Containers are manufactured for movement of heavy goods with
low volume cargo by rail and Sea. Although the half heighted containers are
individually handled, containers are transported together.
43 | P a g e

Use of Half Height Container:
Half height containers are used to transport heavy cargo. Half height
containers are also used to move vehicles. The half height containers are useful to
transport over height goods, pipes, tools and other equipment. Half height containers
are used to transport gravel, sand etc. locally.
Like other containers, half height containers are also manufactured as per
DNV standandards. Certified slings complete wiht shackles, multiple internal tie down
points for security and safety, net securing points, cargo restraining nets, anti slip
surfaces on floors, fork lift pockets etc. are some of the features of half height
container.
10. Ventilated containers:
Ventilated containers are also known as coffee containers, natural ventilated
containers and passive ventilated containers.
In a ventilated container, the ventilation is provided by openings in bottom
and top side of rails of container. Such openings are made by protecting from rain or
spray from outside to let in. he upper side, lower side and corner posts of ventilated
containers have lashing rings to secure the cargo. Lashing rings, to which the cargo
may be secured, are installed in the upper and lower side rails and the corner posts.
The lashing ring in a 20’ ventilated container can take permissible load of 1000kgs.
The permissible weight details for road and rail is mentioned on the container.

Use of Ventilated Containers:
The Ventilated Container is used for cargo which needs ventilation. The
commodity such as Green Coffee beans which requires ventilation on transit can be
transported by Ventilated Containers, hence the name of ventilated containers are also
known as coffee containers. Cocoa beans and other organic goods with high moisture
contents can be moved with ventilated containers.
11. Car Carrier Containers:
Car carrier containers are used to move cars by road and rail. However in
exceptional cases, the car carrier containers are used to ship by sea also. Generally,
RORO (Role on Roll Off) shipping arrangements are done to move cars and other
automobiles by sea. Under RORO shipping, vehicles are directly driven on to RORO
vessel. Compared to shipment of automobiles with car carrier containers, the cost of
transportation is less in RORO shipping.
12. Hard Top Containers:
Walls of hard top containers are also manufactured with corrugated steel with
wood flooring. Hard top containers are equipped with a removable steel roof. The door
header of hard top container may be swiveled out. These features allow to pack and
unpack the cargo very easily. Loading and unloading is also easy, as the door header
can be swiveled out.
44 | P a g e

Lashing rings, to which the cargo may be secured, are installed in the upper
and lower side rails, the corner posts and the middle of the side walls. The lashing
rings on the side rails and corner posts of hard top container may take loads of up to
2000 kg. The lashing rings in the middle of the side walls may take loads of up to 500
kg, if roof is closed.
13. Insulated Containers:
Insulated containers protect goods from temperature which are used to move
cargo such as pharmaceuticals, chemicals, foods etc. The thin wall of a standard dry
container may be effected with external climate severely in hot summer days due to a
lot of heat and severe cold in winter season. Insulated container helps to maintain
consistent internal temperature up to some extent.
The standard container can also be temporarily made insulated by covering
inner part of body with necessary insulating materials.

Uses:
An insulated container also prevents rainwater getting inside the container
and minimizes condensation especially at door opening area. The durability of storage
(long term storage) is another advantage of insulated container.
14. Tunnel Containers:
The Tunnel containers have eight feet ends at both sides which looks like a
tunnel when both sets of doors are open. In some locations, tunnel containers are
also known as tunneltainers, double enders container or double end door container.
Stuffing and de stuffing are easy in a tunnel container due to its accessibility
than a standard container. The cargo can be loaded and unloaded from both ends of
doors. Small and much number of packages can be easily stuffed and de stuffed. A
partition at middle of container can be made for any specific cargo to be loaded and
unloaded easily.
15. Platform Containers:
Platform containers are also manufactured with steel and hard wood. A
Platform container does not have sides, ends and roof, which looks like a pallet. The
customers can load cargo to platform containers from side also.

Use of Platform Containers:
Platform containers are used to transport goods which are heavy weight on
small areas. Platform containers are also useful to load odd sized cargo. Generally, the
platform containers are used to move machinery, oil and gas equipment and other
heavy weight equipment. Like other cargo containers, platform containers are also
comply with ISO standard for domestic and international transportation. For easy
transportation and movement by road, 40’ platform containers have gooseneck
tunnels at each end of container. These recesses allow the containers to lie lower and
therefore to be of taller construction. For more security on loads, lashing rings are
45 | P a g e

fixed in the side rails of platform containers. All platform containers have fork pocket
holes for easy handling.
16. Flat Track Containers:
Flat track containers are made of steel and floored with soft wood. The walls
can either be fixed or collapsible. 20’ and 40’ Flat Track Containers are available in
sizes.
Since the container is flat track, proper lashing of cargo is required. So many
lashing rings are fixed in the side rails of a flat track container. The Flat Track
Containers are available with fork lift pockets also. For easy transportation, gooseneck
tunnels at each end are fixed in a 40’ Flat Track Container.
Some of the Flat Track Containers are available with lashing winches with
lashing belts. For the purpose of movement of certain special cargo, stanchions are
required and some of the Flat Track Container owners provide such stanchions.

46 | P a g e

Use of Flat Track Containers:
If goods are to be loaded from the top or sides of the container, Flat Track
Containers are suitable. Normally, machineries, pipes, timber, steel etc. are loaded in
a Flat Track Container. The heavy weight cargo can easily be loaded in a flat track
container compared to other types of containers.

Non-Containerised Cargo (NCC):
Non-Containerised Cargo refers to goods shipped in pieces separately without
the use of a container. These goods are shipped in crates, bags, boxes, drums, barrels
and they are extremely large in sizes/dimensions. NCC is also known as break bulk.

ORGANISATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH EXPORT PROMOTION
There are various government organisations which help the exporters in
various aspects of export and import.

1. DGFT (Directorate General of Foreign Trade)
Directorate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) organisation is an attached office
of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and is headed by Director General of
Foreign Trade. Right from its inception till 1991, when liberalization in the economic
policies of the Government took place, this organization has been essentially involved
in the regulation and promotion of foreign trade through regulation. Keeping in line
with liberalization and globalization and the overall objective of increasing of exports,
DGFT has since been assigned the role of "facilitator". The shift was from prohibition
and control of imports/exports to promotion and facilitation of exports/imports,
keeping in view the interests of the country.
This Directorate, with headquarters at New Delhi, is responsible
for formulating and implementing the Foreign Trade Policy with the main objective of
promoting India's exports. The DGFT also issues scrips / authorizations to exporters
and monitors their corresponding obligations through a network of regional offices.
DGFT through its power under the FTDR Act notifies various restrictions or
quota or conditions on import of goods into India. These restrictions may require a
licence or registration be applied for and approved prior to the given imports.

Most significant roles and functions of DGFT


Implementation of EXIM Policy / Foreign Trade Policy



Implement of Foreign Trade Procedures



Issues IEC Code to Exporters and Importers



Document and Maintain Classifications ITC-HS Code



Provides Platform for updating e-BRC



Provides Information about the Export Policy Schedule



Grant Export Licenses to Restricted Items

47 | P a g e



Promote Trade with Foreign Borders



Regulate Transit of Goods



Other activities related to Foreign Trade & Commerce

2. EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCILS:
Introduction:
The Export Promotion Councils (EPCs) are organisations of exporters,
registered as non-profit organizations under the Companies Act/ Societies
Registration Act. Roles and functions of these Councils are guided by the Foreign
Trade Policy 2023, which also recognizes them as registering authorities for
exporters. At present, there are 27 Export promotion councils and 9 commodities
boards, as mentioned below, under the Department of Commerce
APPENDIX-2 T
LIST OF EXPORT PROMOTION COUNCILS/COMMODITY BOARDS/
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITIES
S.No.
1.

Name of Export
Promotion Councils/
Commodity Boards
Apparel Export
Promotion Council

2.

Readymade garments.
 Dyes, Dye-Intermediates, Coal Tar

Basic Chemicals,
Pharmaceuticals &
Cosmetics EPC
(CHEMEXCIL)

3

Carpet Export Promotion
Council

4

CAPEXIL

48 | P a g e

Details of products falling with their
jurisdiction







Chemicals and Alcohol
Basic Inorganic and Organic Chemicals
includingAgro Chemicals, Oil Field
Chemicals
Cosmetics and Toiletries, Essential Oils
Perfumery Compounds,
Castor Oil & it's derivatives

Handmade/ Hand knotted Woollen Carpets,
Rugs, Druggets, Durries, Handmade tufted
Carpets, Handmade Silk Carpets,
Handmade Staple/Synthetic Carpets,
Kelem, Schumacks, Namdhas and other
Floor Covernings.
 Animal By-products
 Automobile Tyres & Tube
 Books, Publishing & Printing
 Bulk Minerals & Ores
 Cement, Clinkes & Asbestos Cement
products
 Ceramics & Refractories
 Glass & Glasswares
 Granites, Natural Stones &
Explosives.
 Graphite
Electrodes & Explosives
 Misc. Products such as :

Gambier
Extracts/Myrobalam
Extracts/ Cutch Extracts/
Other dyeing & tanning
extracts
- Fire works
- Safety Matches
- Activated Carbon
- Cocoanut shell Charcoal
- Superphosphates Urea
- Other
Chemical
Fertilizers
- Hard Aggregates for Floor
 Ossein, Glue & Gelatine
 Paints & Allied Products
 Paper,
Board & Paper Products
 Plywood & Allied Products
 Processed Minerals
 Rubber Manufactured Products
 Cotton Yarn & Sewing Thread
 Cotton Fabrics (Grey/Bleached &
Processed Fabrics) including Yarn
Dyed Fabrics:
 Duck/Canvas, Sheetings, Poplin,
Shirting/Suitings, Denims/Drills,
Twills/Sateens,
Sarees/Dhotis/Terry Fabrics,
Furnishings, Voils/Mulls/Muslin,
Knit Fabrics
 Cotton Made-ups – Bed Linens/
Home Furnishings, Terry Towels/
Toweling, Bags/Sacks, Curtains
/Drapes, Blankets, Table/Toilet
/Kitchen, Linens/Napkins,
Handkerchiefs / Dusters,
Carpets/Mats/ Tarpaulins/Tents,
Tapes/Narrow Fabrics, Labels,
Shawls/Scarves, Rope &* Twine,
Drop Cloth, Mosquito
Nets/Netting, Embroidered
Fabrics/Sarees, Dress Materials,
Chaddar/Odhanis, Khangas,
Threads/Packing Threads, Others

Raw Cotton
Leather & Leather products
-

5

Cotton Textiles Export
Promotion Council

6

Council for Leather Exports

7

EEPC INDIA
(Formerly Engineering
Export Promotion Council)

49 | P a g e






Machineries and equipments
Motor Vehicles
Automobile Components
Bicycles, Bicycle Components and
Accessories














8

Electronics & Computer
Software EPC









9

Export Promotion Council
for Handicrafts

Two Wheelers and Three Wheelers
Internal
Combustion Engines,
Compressors and parts thereof
Pumps – all types
Electric and Home Appliances
Hand and Machine Tools
Medical, Surgical and Other
Instruments
Prime Iron & Steel and Products
Thereof
Non-ferrous Metals and Products
Thereof
Railway Rolling Stock and Components
Builders Hardware
Project Exports.
Mica & other Mineral based products.
Miscellaneous Manufacturers
Engineering Products not specified
elsewhere.
Electronics Hardware
Consumer electronics
Electronics instruments
(which includes- industrial
instruments, office equipments,
medical equipments, laboratory
equipments, strategic electronic
equipments)
Electronic components
Computer hardware
Computer software, IT/ITes software
services,
BPO/KPO etc.

Handicraft Items made of:
 Art Metal Ware
 Wood Ware
 Hand printed Textiles and Scarves
 Embroidered and Crocheted Goods
 Shawls as Artware
 Artistic Handmade Jewellery
 Lace and Lace Goods
 Stone artware
 Jute Handicrafts
 Papier Machie
 Agarbatties & Attars
o Miscellaneous Handicrafts

50 | P a g e

10

Export Promotion
Council for EOUs &
SEZ Unitsii

11

Federation of Indian
Export Organisations
(FIEO)
Gem & Jewellery
Export Promotion
Council
(GJEPC)

12

13

Handloom Export
Promotion Council

14

Indian Oil Seeds &
Produce Export
Promotion Council
(IOPEPC)

15

Indian Silk Export
Promotion Council

16

Jute Products
Development and
Export Promotion
Council -(JPDEPC)

17

Pharmaceuticals
Export Promotion
Council

All products by EOU except in case of
spices. In case of spices, it would be
mandatory for units to get themselves
registered with Spices Board also.
Multi Products & Residual Products
Polished & Processed Pearls (real or culture)
 Cut & Polished Diamonds
 Cut & Polished Coloured Gemstones
 Jewellery containing gold, silver,
platinum, or palladium and studded
with diamonds,
 coloured gemstones, real or cultured
pearls or synthetic/ imitation stones
 Cut and Polished Synthetic Stones
 Costume/Fashion Jewellery
 Silver Filligree Jewellery & Silver
Filligree
 Rough Diamonds
All Handloom Products like: Fabrics, Home
Furnishings, Carpets, Floor coverings etc.
Sesame seed, Niger seed, Oil seeds and
oils, other than de-oiled cake, rice bran oil,
soya oil, soya de-oiled cake and the
products other than those dealt by Shellac
& Forest Product Export Promotion Council.
Natural silks and silk Blends and their
products including readymade
Garments and Carpets.
All types of jute, jute blended and jute
union products made from jute fibre,
yarn, twine and fabric for conventional,
technical and new & diversified















51 | P a g e

Bulk Drugs and its intermediates,
Formulations
Herbal
Ayurvedic,
Unani
Homeopathic medicines
Biotech & biological products
Diagnostics
Surgical
Nutraceuticals & pharma industry
related services
Collaborative research
Contract manufacturing
Clinical trials and consultants etc
Pharma related services.

18

Plastics Export
Promotion Council

19

Power loom
Development &
Export Promotion
Council

20

Project Exports
Promotion Council of
India

21

Services Export
Promotion Council
(SEPC)iii

All plastics products covering plastic raw
materials: intermediate products like plastic
Films, sheets etc .plastic packaging
materials including Plastic woven
sacks/fabrics/bags & Flexible Intermediate
Bulk containers (FIBC’s) Plastic Tarpaulins,
plastic consumer items, PVC Leather
Cloth/Foam leather, floor coverings (incl.
Linoleums), Moulded/soft luggage,
FRP/GRP products PVC Rigid/ Flexible,
Pipe fittings, Toys Dolls and Game, Plastic
Electrical Accessories, Laminates, Fishnets.
Fishing Lines, Cordage/Ropes
/Twines/Yarn/Bristles, PVC fabricated
goods, PVC Sheeting/Film, Intraocular
Lenses, Spactacle Frames, Hard Resilene
Lenses, goggles, Poly-Lines Jute goods,
Disposable Syringes, blood/urine bags I.V.
sets, Dental products and other medical
disposables, Cine X-Ray Films, Plastic
bangles/Imitation Jewellery and all
products made predominantly of plastic
materials by processing raw materials
through injecton/blow moulding.
Extrusion, calendaring, fabrications and
other processes: writing instruments
and human hair and products thereof
Power loom products

Civil Construction (Structures/Infrastructure)
Turnkey
Process And Engineering Consultancy
Services
Project Construction Items (Excluding Steel
And Cement) / Project Goods













52 | P a g e

Accounting /Auditing and Book
Keeping Services
Advertising Services
Architectural Services
Consultancy Services
Distribution Services
Educational Services
Entertainment Services including
Audio-Visual Services
Environmental Services
Healthcare Services
Hotel And Tourism Services
Legal Services




22

23
24
25
26
27

Shellac & Forest
Products Export
Promotion Council
(SHEFEXIL)
Sports Goods
Export Promotion
Council (SQEPC)
Synthetic & Rayon
Textiles Export
Promotion Council
Telecom Equipment And
Services Export Promotion
Council (TEPC)
Wool Industry Export
Promotion Council
Wool & Woollens Export
Promotion Council

Maritime Transport
Marketing Research and Public
Opinion Polling Services/
Management Services
 Printing and Publishing
Others
Shellac & lac based products, Guar gum,
Herbs, Vegetable saps & extracts/Oil cakes
etc., minor forest produce.
All Sports needs & equipments
Fibre, Yarn, Fabrics, Made-Ups & Home
Textiles
All Telecom, Broadband & internet
Equipments
Wool & Wool Products
Wool & Woollen Products

28
29

Coffee Board
Coir Board

All Verities of Coffee Products
Coir Fibre, Yarn & Coir Products

30

Rubber Board

Natural, Synthetic & Reclaimed Rubber

31

Spices Board

All Indian Spices & others

32

Tea Board

Darjeeling, Assam, Nilgiri, Kangra, DooarsTerai, Masala Tea, Sikkim Tea & Tripura

33

Tobacco Board

Unmanufactured Tobacco
 Flue cured Virginia
 Light Soil Burley
 Sun cured country
 Chewing Tobacco
 Bidi Tobacco
 Cigar Tobacco
 HDBRG
Manufactured Tobacco products
 Cigarettes
 Cigars
 Cigarillos
 Beedis
 Cut tobacco
 Chewing tobacco
 Hookah tobacco paste
 Snuff

53 | P a g e

34

Agricultural and
Processed Food
Products Export
Development
Authority (APEDA)

35

Coconut Development
Board

36

Marine Products
Export Development
Authority
(MPEDA)



Fruits, Vegetable and their
products
 Meat and meat products
 Poultry and poultry products
 Dairy products
 Confectionary, biscuits and bakery
products
 Honey, jiggery and sugar products
 Cocoa and its products, chocolates
of all kinds
 Alcoholic and non-alcoholic
beverages
 Cereals and cereals products
 Groundnuts, peanuts and walnut
 Pickles, chutneys and papads
 Guar Gum
 Floriculture and floriculture
products
 Herbal and medicinal plants
 Cashew Kernels
 Cashew Shell Liquid
 Kardanoliv
All coconut products other than those made
from coconut husk & fiber
Marine Products including all varieties of
fishery products known commercially as
shrimp, prawn, lobster, crab, fish, shellfish, other aquatic animals or plants or part
thereof.

Role of EPCs:
Export Promotion Councils encourage exporters, both old and new, to attend
a variety of workshops that they conduct throughout the year. These workshops
address topics like documentation, understanding of commercial terms, designing
business plans, and understanding finances. These are excellent platforms for
exporters to find solutions and advice on their business and financial needs. One-toone correspondence with the EPCs to seek financial guidance is also an option.

3. ECGC Limited:
ECGC Ltd. (Formerly known as Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India
Ltd.) wholly owned by Government of India, was set up in 1957 with the objective of
promoting exports from the country by providing credit risk insurance and related
services for exports.

54 | P a g e

ECGC provides
I.
II.
III.

a range of insurance covers to Indian exporters against the risk of non –
realization of export proceeds due to commercial or political risks
different types of credit insurance covers to banks and other financial
institutions to enable them to extend credit facilities to exporters and
Export Factoring facility for MSME sector which is a package of financial
products consisting of working capital financing, credit risk protection,
maintenance of sales ledger and collection of export receivables from the buyer
located in overseas country.

4. India Trade Promotion Organization (ITPO):










India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) is the premier trade promotion
agency of India, provides a broad spectrum of services to trade and industry and
acts as a catalyst for growth of India’s trade. The main corporate objectives of
ITPO are:
To promote external and domestic trade of India in cost effective manner by
organizing and participating in international trade fairs in India and abroad;
organizing buyer-seller meets and contact promotion programmes abroad;
conducting overseas market surveys, exchanging and contact promotion
programmes abroad; conducting overseas market surveys, exchanging and
coordinating visits of business delegations, and undertake need based research
to facilitate trade in specific sectors/markets;
To support and assist small and medium enterprises to access markets both in
India and abroad;
To disseminate trade information and facilitate E-commerce/trade;
To develop quality physical infrastructure, services and management so as to
enable holding of trade promotion events such as conventions and trade
exhibitions of international standard; and
To enlist the involvement and support of the State Governments, other
government trade promotion agencies, trade and industry associations in trade
promotion of India’s external and domestic trade.

5. MMTC (Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation) Limited:
MMTC Limited was incorporated in 1963 primarily to regulate the
International trade of Minerals and Metals. Over the years, MMTC diversified its
business portfolio keeping in view national requirements / new business opportunities
and new product lines like Agro Commodities, Fertilizers, Precious Metals, Coal were
added to the product profile of MMTC.
Besides acting as canalizing agency for Iron Ore, Manganese Ore, Chrome
Ore/Concentrate, MMTC functions as one of the Nominated Agency for Import of Gold
& Silver and Urea, besides trading in other commodities.

55 | P a g e

6. PEC Limited:
PEC Ltd (formerly – The Project and Equipment Corporation of India Ltd.) was
carved out of the STC in 1971-72 to take over the canalized business of STC’s (State
Trading Corporation of India Ltd.) railway equipment division, to diversify into
turn-key projects especially outside India and to aid and assist in promotion of exports
of Indian engineering equipment.
The main functions of PEC Ltd. include export of projects, engineering
equipment and manufactured goods, defence equipment & stores, import of industrial
raw materials, bullion and agro commodities, consolidation of existing lines of
business and simultaneously developing new products and new markets;
diversification in export of non-engineering items eg. Coal and coke, iron ore, edible
oils, steel scraps, etc.; and structuring counter trade/ special trading arrangements
for further exports.

7. State Trading Corporation of India Limited (STC):
STC was set up on 18th May 1956 primarily with a view to undertake trade
with East European countries and to supplement the efforts of private trade and
industry in developing exports from the country. STC played an important role in
country’s economy. It arranged imports of essential items of mass consumption (such
as wheat, pulses, sugar, edible oils, etc.) and industrial raw materials into India and
also contributed significantly in developing exports of a large number of items from
India.

8. Bureau of Indian Standards:
BIS is the National Standard Body of India established under the BIS Act
2016 for the harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and
quality certification of goods and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.BIS has been providing traceability and tangibility benefits to the national
economy in a number of ways – providing safe reliable quality goods; minimizing
health hazards to consumers; promoting exports and imports substitute; control over
proliferation of varieties etc. through standardization, certification and testing.
Keeping in view, the interest of consumers as well as the industry, BIS is involved in
various activities as given below:
•
Standards Formulation
•
Product Certification Scheme
•
Compulsory Registration Scheme
•
Foreign Manufacturers Certification Scheme
•
Hall Marking Scheme
•
Laboratory Services
•
Laboratory Recognition Scheme
•
Sale of Indian Standards
•
Consumer Affairs Activities
•
Promotional Activities
•
Training Services, National & International level
•
Information Services
56 | P a g e

9. Export Inspection Council of India:
The Export Inspection Council (EIC) is the official export –certification body of
India which ensures quality and safety of products exported from India. EIC was set
up by the Government of India under Section 3 of the Export (Quality Control and
Inspection) Act, 1963 to ensure sound development of export trade of India through
quality control and inspection and matters connected therewith. The role of EIC is to
ensure that products notified under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act
1963 are meeting the requirements of the importing countries in respect of their
quality and safety.
EIC provides mandatory certification for various Food items namely fish & fishery
products, dairy product, honey, egg products, meat and meat products, poultry meat
products, animal casing, Gelatine, Ossein and crushed bones and feed additive and
pre-mixtures while other food and non-food products are certified on voluntary basis.

10.

Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics
(DGCI&S):

Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&S),
Kolkata, under the Ministry of Commerce, Government of India, is the pioneer official
organization for collection, compilation and dissemination of India’s Trade Statistics
and Commercial Information.
This Directorate, with its office located at Kolkata, is headed by the Director
General, an Additional Secretary level officer of Indian Statistical Services (ISS). It is
entrusted with the work of collecting, compiling and publishing/disseminating trade
statistics and various types of commercial information required by the policy makers,
researchers, importers, exporters, traders as well as overseas buyers. It is the first
large scale data processing organization functioning as a nodal agency for Export &
Import data in the country with ISO certification 9001:2015 for Compilation and
Dissemination of India’s foreign trade statistics.
DGCIS receives the basic data for both export and import of goods in the form
of DTRs (Daily Trade Returns) from different Customs formations and the Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) as a part of the administrative data generated whenever any
international merchandise trade takes place. The Customs Authority transmits these
DTRs in three different modes, namely, Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), Non-EDI
and Manual. The EDI data is transmitted on-line daily through Indian Customs EDI
Gateway (ICEGATE).

11.

Footwear Design & Development Institute (FDDI):

Footwear Design and Development Institute was established in the year 1986
as a Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 with an objective to provide
skilled manpower to the leather industry. In the year 2017, the institute has been
conferred the status of “Institution of National Importance” as per the Footwear Design
and Development Institute Act, 2017.
57 | P a g e

FDDI conducts wide range of professional programmes in the area of Footwear
Design & Production Management, Creative Designing CAD/CAM, Fashion
Merchandizing & Retail Management, Leather goods & Accessories Design, Fashion
Design and Business management etc. thus, providing trained high-class
professionals, managers, fashion Designers, technologists to the industry to keep pace
with the growing demand.

12.

Indian Institute of Packaging:

The Institute is involved in different activities like testing and certification of
packaging materials and packages, training and education, consultancy services and
R&D activities related to packaging.
The Institute is involved in various activities like Testing and Certification of packaging
materials and packaging for domestic and export market, including mandatory UN
Certification of packaging for transport of hazardous/dangerous goods, Training and
Education, Consultancy and Projects and Research and Development in the area of
packaging.

13.

Indian Diamond Institute:

The Indian Diamond Institute (IDI) was established as a Society in the year
1978 at Surat, Gujarat with the objective of imparting education in the field of Gem &
Jewellery sector including Diamond Manufacturing aspects and thereby enhancing the
quality, design and global competitiveness of the Indian Jewellery. The Institute is
sponsored by Department of Commerce and is a project of Gems and jewellery Export
Promotion Council (GJEPC).

14.

Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT):

The Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT), a Deemed to be University, was
established in 1963, as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Commerce &
Industry, Government of India. It has contributed significantly towards the external
trade sector of India through policy research and skill-building over the past six
decades. The Institute has emerged as a leading Business School in the country and
has been consistently ranked among the top 10 B-Schools in the country.

Mission:
To be an Academic Center of Excellence in International Business research,
training and education

Vision:
To create and foster a learning environment that enables participants to be
leaders in international business with sensitivity towards society.

58 | P a g e

Beliefs:
•

Knowledge Brings All Gains (Vidhyeya Labhathe Sarvam) Learning is preserved
by Application (Vidhya Yogena Rakshyate).

•

IIFT recognizes the importance of the fact that excellence in the creation of
knowledge must be aligned with excellence in transmitting that knowledge.

15.

Plant Quarantine Information System (PQIS):

To prevent the entry, establishment and spread of exotic pests in India as per
the provisions of The Destructive Insects & Pests Act, 1914 and the notifications
issued there under.

Objective:
To provide an efficient and effective service, that fully satisfies our customers,
such as importers, exporters, individuals and the Government.

Mission:
•

•

•

To protect our plant life from ravages of destructive pests by preventing their
entry, establishment and spread and thereby increasing agriculture productivity
in order to improve the economy of our country.
To facilitate export certification of plants and plant products for safe global trade
in agricultural commodities and thereby fulfilling our legal obligations under the
international agreements.
To adopt safe quarantine practices to protect our environment.

Vision:
•
•
•

Dynamic quarantine programmes to protect our plant life and environment.
Sound inspection systems to safe guard the interests of farming community and
the consumers and overseas marketing agencies and
Sustained quality export certification to allow our competitiveness in the global
trade in agriculture.

16.

Animal Quarantine & Certification Services (AQCS):

The purpose and scope of setting up of QUARANTINE Stations is to prevent
the ingress of dangerous exotic diseases into the country through imported livestock
and livestock products. The increased and faster international trade and travel
exposed every country to the danger of infiltration of known and unknown
transmissible diseases which have the potential of very serious and rapid spread,
adverse socio-economic and human/animal health consequences. The Quarantine
Services are necessary to keep the country free from many exotic diseases and AQCS
plays an important part to maintain the country disease freedom.
59 | P a g e

Vision:
To prevent the entry of any exotic disease through international trade and
travel into India and to ensure the health and safety of the animal and human life.

Mission:
National Health Security: Protection of Indian animal and human population
from exotic diseases through effective check on import and to ensure qualitative
export.

Objectives:
•

•

•
•

To prevent the ingress of any Exotic Livestock Diseases into India through
importation of livestock & livestock products as per the provisions of Livestock
Importation Act.
To act as Defence force against ingress of exotic disease of Veterinary
importance by implementing the policies pertaining to import regulation,
restriction, prohibition of the livestock and livestock Products, Biological and
Micro- Organisms.
To provide an internationally accepted certification service for augmenting
export and to increase National income.
To inspect and register the plants/mills exporting the animal by-products.

Functions:
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Implementation of the provisions of the Livestock Importation Act and Central
Government orders in force on importation and exportation of livestock and
livestock products.
Detention, segregation, observation and testing of livestock and livestock
products meant for import/export.
Destruction and disposal of imported livestock and livestock products found
infected and posing threat to the national health security.
Pre-shipment Quality control to increase National exchequer.
To have proper liaison with Custom authorities for effective and proper
implementation of Livestock and Livestock Product Importation Act.
To be in close association with the State Directors of Animal Husbandry
regarding disease position and surveillance.
To associate with the Heads of various recognized laboratories in India for
getting expert opinion and for testing of materials.
To supervise production and packing of LSP meant for export as per the
specifications of the importing countries.
Inspection and registration of plants/mills exporting the animal-by-products.

SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES (SEZs):
Asia's first Export Processing Zone (EPZ) was set up in Kandla in 1965,
followed by establishment of seven more EPZs in the country. Subsequently, Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) Policy was announced in April 2000 wherein various new
60 | P a g e

features were incorporated. This policy intended to make SEZs an engine for economic
growth supported by quality infrastructure and complemented by an attractive fiscal
package, both at the Centre and the State level, with a user-friendly regulatory
framework. All the 8 pre-existing EPZs located at Kandla and Surat (Gujarat), Santa
Cruz (Maharashtra), Cochin (Kerala), Chennai (Tamil Nadu), Visakhapatnam (Andhra
Pradesh), Falta (West Bengal) and Noida (Uttar Pradesh) were converted into Special
Economic Zones.
[

The main objectives of the SEZ Act are:


Generation of additional economic activity



Promotion of exports of goods and services



Promotion of investment from domestic and foreign sources



Creation of employment opportunities



Development of infrastructure facilities

EXPORT ORIENTED UNITS (EOUs):
The Export Oriented Units (EOUs) scheme was introduced in early 1981,
primarily to boost exports by creating additional production capacity. It was
introduced as a complementary scheme to the Free Trade Zones/Export Processing
Zone (EPZ) Scheme introduced in the sixties. It adopts the same production regime as
SEZs (erstwhile EPZs) but offers a wide option in locations.
Units undertaking to export their entire production of goods and services, except
permissible sales in the DTA, as per the Export-Import Policy are referred to as export
oriented units (EOUs). The EOUs function under the administrative control of the
concerned Development Commissioner of Special Economic Zone i.e., under the
Department of Commerce, Government of India.
The EOUs are governed by the provisions of Chapter 6 of the Foreign Trade Policy
(FTP) and its procedures, as contained in the Handbook of Procedures (HBH).

MANUFACTURING / PRODUCING EXPORTS
Introduction:
The Indian manufacturing industry generated 16-17 percent of India’s GDP
pre-pandemic and is projected to be one of the fastest growing sectors. The machine
tool industry was literally the nuts and bolts of the manufacturing industry in India.
Today, technology has stimulated innovation with digital transformation a key aspect
in gaining an edge in this highly competitive market.
Both the Government of India and Indian companies recognizes the need to
move forward to the next and latest phase of industry.

61 | P a g e

 The National Manufacturing Policy of the Government of India aims to increase
the share of manufacturing in GDP to 25 percent by 2025.
 The “Make in India” policy of the Government of India is expected to increase the
demand and consumption for machinery and equipment by the local
manufacturing industry.
 To be implemented from 2022, the Production-linked incentive (PLI) scheme was
launched by the Government of India to develop 13 sectors on par with global
manufacturing standards.
India is gradually progressing on the road to Industry 4.0 through the
Government of India’s initiatives.
Government of India has undertaken several schemes/initiatives to promote
manufacturing sector.

Schemes undertaken by DPIIT to promote manufacturing sector:
Government of India has undertaken various steps to promote
manufacturing sector and to boost domestic and foreign investments in India.
These include introduction of Goods and Services Tax, reduction in Corporate tax,
interventions to improve ease of doing business, FDI policy reforms, measures for
reduction in compliance burden, policy measures to boost domestic manufacturing
through public procurement orders, Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP), to
name a few.
The series of measures taken by the Government to improve the economic
situation and convert the disruption caused by COVID 19 into an opportunity for
growth includes Atmanirbhar packages, introduction of Production Linked
Incentive (PLI) Scheme in various Ministries, investment opportunities under
National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) and National Monetisation Pipeline (NMP),
India Industrial Land Bank (IILB), Industrial Park Rating System (IPRS), soft
launch of the National Single Window System (NSWS), etc. An institutional
mechanism to fast-track investments has been put in place, in the form of Project
Development Cells (PDCs) in all concerned Ministries/ Departments of Government
of India.

Details of some of the major initiatives /schemes are as follows:
Make in India initiative:
‘Make in India’ is an initiative which was launched on 25th September 2014
to facilitate investment, foster innovation, build best in class infrastructure and
make India a hub for manufacturing, design and innovation. It was one of the
unique single, vocal for local initiative that promoted India’s manufacturing domain
to the world. ‘Make in India’ initiative is not the state/district/city/area specific
initiative, rather it is being implemented all over the country.

62 | P a g e

Industrial Corridor Development Programme:
In order to accelerate growth in manufacturing, Government of India (GoI) has
adopted the strategy of developing Industrial Corridors in partnership with State
Governments. The objective of this programme is to develop Greenfield Industrial
regions/areas/nodes with sustainable infrastructure & make available Plug and
Play Infrastructure at the plot level. As part of National Industrial Corridor Program,
11 Industrial Corridors are being developed in 4 phases.

Ease of Doing Business:
The objective is to improve Ease of Doing Business and Ease of Living by
Simplifying, Rationalizing, Digitizing and Decriminalizing Government to Business
and Citizen Interfaces across Ministries/States/UTs. The key focus areas of the
initiative are simplification of procedures, rationalization of legal provisions,
digitization of government processes, and decriminalization of minor, technical or
procedural defaults.

National Single Window System:
The setting up of National Single Window System (NSWS) was announced in
the Budget 2020-21 with the objective to provide “end to end” facilitation and
support to investors, including pre-investment advisory, provide information related
to land banks and facilitate clearances at Centre and State level. Envisioned as a
one-stop shop for investor related approvals and services in the country, the
National Single Window System (NSWS) was soft-launched on 22nd September,
2021 by Hon’ble Commerce & Industry Minister. Large number of States/UTs Single
Window Systems have been linked with the NSWS Portal thereby providing access
to approvals of these States/UTs to be applied through NSWS.

PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan (NMP):
PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan (NMP), a GIS based platform with
portals of various Ministries/Departments of Government, was launched in October,
2021. It is a transformative approach to facilitate data-based decisions related to
integrated planning of multimodal infrastructure, thereby reducing logistics cost.
Empowered Group of Secretaries (EGoS) and Network Planning Group (NPG) have
been created as institutional arrangement. About 2000 data layers of various
Central Ministries/Departments/State Governments have so far been uploaded on
the NMP.

National Logistics Policy:
National Logistics Policy (NLP) was launched on 17th September 2022, that
aims to lower the cost of logistics and lead it to par with other developed countries.
It is a comprehensive effort to address cost inefficiency by laying down an
overarching interdisciplinary, cross-sectoral, and multi-jurisdictional framework for
63 | P a g e

developing entire logistics ecosystem. This would boost economic growth, provide
employment opportunities, and make Indian products more competitive in the
global market.

Production Linked Incentive scheme:
Keeping in view India’s vision of becoming ‘Atmanirbhar’, Production Linked
Incentive (PLI) Schemes for 14 key sectors have been announced with an outlay of
Rs. 1.97 lakh crore to enhance India’s manufacturing capabilities and Exports.
These schemes have potential for creation of high production, economic growth,
exports and significant employment over the next five years and more.

Schemes undertaken by other Ministries/ Departments to promote
manufacturing sector:
Udyami Bharat Scheme:
‘Udyami Bharat’ is reflective of the continuous commitment of the
government, right from day one, to work towards the empowerment of Micro Small
and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). The government has launched several initiatives
from time to time like MUDRA Yojana, Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme,
Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of Traditional Industries (SFURTI) etc. to provide
necessary and timely support to the MSME sector, which has helped benefit crores
of people across the country.
‘Raising and Accelerating MSME Performance’ (RAMP) scheme with an outlay
of around Rs 6000 crore, aims to scale up the implementation capacity and
coverage of MSMEs in the States, with impact enhancement of existing MSME
schemes.

PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA):
In order to have world-class industrial infrastructure which would attract
cutting age technology and boost FDI and local investment in the textiles sector,
Ministry of Textiles issued notification to set up 7 Mega Integrated Textile Region
and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks with a total outlay of Rs. 4,445 crore. These parks
will offer an opportunity to create an integrated textiles value chain right from
spinning, weaving, processing/dyeing and printing to garment manufacturing at
one location. PM MITRA scheme aspires to position India strongly on the Global
textiles map.

FINANCE / LOANS
Introduction:
Export finance refers to the various financial products and services that are
available to companies that are engaged in exporting goods or services. These products
and services can include things like export credit insurance, export loans, and trade
finance services such as letters of credit. The goal of export finance is to help
64 | P a g e

companies manage the risks and costs associated with exporting, and to provide them
with the funding they need to grow their export business.

Export Finance Benefits from Government:
The government can also be an important source of finance for you, through
export benefits that you stand to earn.
Financial assistance by the government and its agencies includes measures
like an advance authorization scheme which waives import duty if the goods are used
as inputs for export products; duty drawback schemes which refund duties and taxes
paid for inputs to exporters; for electronic products, a zero-duty export promotion
capital goods scheme available on the import of capital goods; and, the post-export
EPCG Duty Credit Scrip Scheme which enables exporters to claim a refund on duties
paid to customs officials.

Providers of Export Finance:
There are different banks, non-banking financial corporations, and foreign
trade-specific lenders that offer financial assistance to exporters like you.
 The Export-Import (Exim) Bank of India provides buyer’s credit, corporate banking
products, lines of credit, project-based finance, etc.
 Banks, including nationalized banks, private sector banks, foreign banks, regional
rural banks, certain cooperative banks, etc. all provide financing.
Their services may include pre-shipment or post-shipment finance, lines of
credit, foreign currency loans, advances against bills sent on collection/deemed
exports/undrawn balance, etc. Of course, not all banks/branches may offer export
specific products – be sure to study your bank’s offerings thoroughly before going
ahead.

Precautions & Warnings:






Government benefits are subject to various terms and conditions – be sure to
check the terms and conditions thoroughly. For example, your product may
not qualify under a scheme, or the scheme may be applicable only for certain
selected markets.
Don’t undertake export orders if their completion is not feasible from a
financial standpoint. You may either fail to arrange for the necessary finance or
find it available only at exorbitant costs. It is always advisable to undertake
export operations within your financial means.
Don’t apply for finance beyond your repayment capacity – defaults will erode
your credibility for future financing purposes.

65 | P a g e

LOGISTICS AND COLD CHAIN

Introduction:
Logistics represents the entire supply chain channel which includes
streamlining of order handling, transportation, inventory management and handling,
storage, packaging, and clearing of the export goods. Efficient management of logistics
by any export firm can give them a competitive advantage through better order
handling and improved cash flows.

Export Logistics Process:
Once the product has been cleared for dispatch from the factory or the
warehouse facility, the logistics process formally starts. One of the first things
exporters need to do is to decide the mode of shipping and zero-in on an ocean freight
forwarder, who is responsible for arranging and managing the transport of goods from
point A to point B.
A freight forwarder maintains working relationships with several vessel
operators and even non-vessel operating carriers to secure great deals for the shipper.
The next step is to arrange for a customs clearance agent for shipping, who is
responsible for ensuring all laws and compliances with respect to export processes
and the custom clearance requirements are adhered to till the goods reach the final
point of destination.
Another aspect to consider is the container shipping method. For example, if
one is shipping by sea/ocean freight export, and the quantum of goods being shipped
is not enough to fill a full container load (also called FCL), then the shipper or exporter
may have to arrange for less than container load shipments.
The goods to be shipped must be packed in an ‘export-ready’ manner, which
includes the necessary marking and labelling of the cases, packages, or cartons. An
export packing list document is required if more than one package is to be dispatched
in the lot. The goods are then cleared from the exporter’s premises, after completing
excise formalities (if any).

Export Logistics Documentation:
The activities involved in the logistics process naturally have a flow of
documentation:
 Commercial invoice
 Dock receipt
 Bill of lading
 Certificate of origin
66 | P a g e

 Warehouse receipt
 Inspection certificate
 Export license
 Packing list
 Health certificate
 Insurance certificate
 Shipper’s letter of instruction
 Destination Control statement

Export Logistics – Transportation Process:
When it comes to sending the export products to the destination, various
parties are involved in the process. Apart from the exporter, there is the buyer, the
banks on either side of the transaction, the insurance company, export freight
forwarding, customs house agents, C&F agents, the customs department, port
authorities, transit transport providers, and the shipping company.

67 | P a g e

68 | P a g e

Let’s take a closer look at the entire export logistics tracking process:


Once the goods are manufactured and the pre-shipment inspection and quality
checks are done, the exporter or the customs house agent packages, labels, and
marks the goods to adhere to the standard shipping practices.



Thereafter, the exporter or the freight forwarder obtains a delivery order that
needs to be collected for the containers and makes arrangements for the pick-up,
stuffing, and sealing of the containers.
They then arrange for intermodal transportation, which will carry the goods from
the exporter’s premises to the point of loading.
Once the goods arrive at the port, the exporter or their agent arranges for the
customs clearance, documentation, and physical verification.
The documents and mate’s receipts are handed to the shipping line, which then
provides a bill of lading to the exporter. The exporter has to send the original bill
of lading and other documents to the buyer or their consignee/agent. These
documents are later required by the buyer or their agent to take custody of the
goods and for getting import clearance at the port of destination.
Meanwhile, the goods are loaded to the carrier and depart from the port of origin.







COLD CHAIN LOGISTICS
Introduction:
The Cold Chain refers to the transportation of temperature sensitive products
like perishable goods from the point of origin to point of consumption in the food
supply chain. Cold chain process helps reducing spoilage, retains the quality of the
harvested products and guarantees a cost efficient delivery to the consumer which can
be transported over long distance and can be preserved beyond the life of the product.
Different products require different temperature level maintenance to ensure their
integrity throughout the travel process. For instance, the most common temperature
standards are “banana” (13 °C), “chill” (2 °C), “frozen” (-18 °C) and “deep frozen” (-29
°C). Staying within this temperature is vital to the integrity of a shipment along the
supply chain. Any deviations from the prescribed temperature limits will damage the
goods in the transit.

The complete Cold chain logistics system consists of:
 Cold Storages: This part of logistics consists of acquiring products from the point of
origin and storing them in temperature controlled environment for the further transit
to the point of consumption or point of sale.
 Refrigerated Carriers: Refrigerated Carriers form the primary distribution in a Cold
Chain process. The main aim is continuous maintenance of in-transit required
temperature. Failure in this part will be a major setback to the whole process.
 Packaging: It can be viewed as the Value added service in the Cold Chain process.
It contains adhering to the various specifications and packaging the products.

69 | P a g e

 Warehousing: Warehousing forms the secondary distribution system of the Cold
Chain process. After transportation of the products, they need to be stored in a cold
storage unit from where they can deliver to the clients based on their requirements.
 Management Information Systems (Traceability and Tracking etc.): Throughout
the transit of the goods, there should be continuous monitoring of the temperature
and efficient supply chain management system should have tracking systems in place
to trace the products and vehicles in transit to avoid any malfunctions.

SPS & TBT
SPS Agreement (Sanitary and Phytosanitary):
The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures (the "SPS Agreement") entered into force with the establishment of the World
Trade Organization on 1 January 1995. It concerns the application of food safety and
animal and plant health regulations.

Introduction:
The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures sets out the basic rules for food safety and animal and plant health
standards.
It allows countries to set their own standards. But it also says regulations
must be based on science. They should be applied only to the extent necessary to
protect human, animal or plant life or health. And they should not arbitrarily or
unjustifiably discriminate between countries where identical or similar conditions
prevail.
Member countries are encouraged to use international standards, guidelines
and recommendations where they exist. However, members may use measures which
result in higher standards if there is scientific justification. They can also set higher
standards based on appropriate assessment of risks so long as the approach is
consistent, not arbitrary.
The agreement still allows countries to use different standards and different
methods of inspecting products.

Key Features:
All countries maintain measures to ensure that food is safe for consumers,
and to prevent the spread of pests or diseases among animals and plants. These
sanitary and phytosanitary measures can take many forms, such as requiring
products to come from a disease-free area, inspection of products, specific treatment
or processing of products, setting of allowable maximum levels of pesticide residues or
permitted use of only certain additives in food. Sanitary (human and animal health)
and phytosanitary (plant health) measures apply to domestically produced food or
local animal and plant diseases, as well as to products coming from other countries.

70 | P a g e

International standards:
The SPS Agreement encourages governments to establish national SPS
measures consistent with international standards, guidelines and recommendations.
This process is often referred to as "harmonization". The WTO itself does not and will
not develop such standards. However, most of the WTO’s member governments (132 at
the date of drafting) participate in the development of these standards in other
international bodies. The standards are developed by leading scientists in the field and
governmental experts on health protection and are subject to international scrutiny
and review.

Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures:
For the purposes of the SPS Agreement, sanitary and phytosanitary measures
are defined as any measures applied:


To protect human or animal life from risks arising from additives, contaminants,
toxins or disease-causing organisms in their food;
 To protect human life from plant- or animal-carried diseases;
 To protect animal or plant life from pests, diseases, or disease-causing
organisms;
 To prevent or limit other damage to a country from the entry, establishment or
spread of pests.
These include sanitary and phytosanitary measures taken to protect the health of
fish and wild fauna, as well as of forests and wild flora.

Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT):
The Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Agreement aims to ensure that
technical regulations, standards, and conformity assessment procedures are nondiscriminatory and do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade. At the same time, it
recognises WTO members’ right to implement measures to achieve legitimate policy
objectives, such as the protection of human health and safety, or protection of the
environment. The TBT Agreement strongly encourages members to base their
measures on international standards as a means to facilitate trade. Through its
transparency provisions, it also aims to create a predictable trading environment.

Technical Regulations and Standards:
The TBT Agreement makes a distinction between technical regulations and
standards: technical regulations are mandatory measures imposed by governments,
whereas standards are voluntary measures. Both terms are understood to cover
measures based upon:
 Product characteristics;
 Process and production methods related to product characteristics
 Terminology, symbols, packaging, marking and labelling requirements as they
apply to a product, process or production method.
71 | P a g e

According to the Agreement, WTO Member governments, wherever possible,
shall specify technical regulations and standards in terms of performance rather than
design or descriptive characteristics.
The TBT Agreement recognizes that no government should be prevented from
adopting technical regulations and standards to fulfill a legitimate objective. The
Agreement has identified the following list as examples of legitimate objectives:
national security, protection of human, animal or plant life or health, or the
environment, and prevention of deceptive practices. In adopting measures to achieve
such goals, however, governments should ensure that they do not create unnecessary
obstacles to trade.

EXPORT PROMOTION SCHEMES
Remission of Duties or Taxes on Export Products Scheme (RoDTEP)
RoDTEP stands for the Remission of Duties or Taxes on Export Products Scheme.
The scheme has been introduced with an objective to neutralize the taxes and duties
suffered on exported goods which are otherwise not credited or remitted or refunded in
any manner and remain embedded in the export goods. This scheme provides for
rebate of all hidden Central, State, and Local duties/taxes/levies on the goods
exported which have not been refunded under any other existing scheme. This does
not only include the direct cost incurred by the exporter but also the prior stage
cumulative indirect taxes on goods. It is a WTO compliant Scheme and follows the
global principle that the taxes/duties should not be exported; they should be either
exempted or remitted to exporters, to make the goods competitive in the global market.
The RoDTEP scheme has been made effective for the exports from 1st January 2021.
Foreign Trade Policy 2015-20 and other schemes provide promotional measures
to boost India’s exports with the objective to offset infrastructural inefficiencies and
associated costs involved to provide exporters a level playing field. Brief of these
measures are as under:

DUTY EXEMPTION & REMISSION SCHEMES
These schemes enable duty free import of inputs for export production with
export obligation. These schemes consist of:-

Advance Authorization Scheme:
Under this scheme, duty free import of inputs are allowed, that are physically
incorporated in the export product (after making normal allowance for wastage) with
minimum 15% value addition. Advance Authorization (AA) is issued for inputs in
relation to resultant products as per SION or on the basis of self declaration, as per
procedures of FTP. AA normally have a validity period of 12 months for the purpose of
making imports and a period of 18 months for fulfilment of Export Obligation (EO)
from the date of issue. AA is issued either to a manufacturer exporter or merchant
exporter tied to a supporting manufacturer(s).
72 | P a g e

Advance Authorization For Annual Requirement:
Exporters having past export performance (in at least preceding two financial
years) shall be entitled for Advance Authorization for Annual requirement. This shall
only be issued for items having SION.

Duty Free Import Authorization (DFIA) Scheme:
DFIA is issued to allow duty free import of inputs, with a minimum value addition
requirement of 20%. DFIA shall be exempted only from the payment of basic customs
duty. DFIA shall be issued on post export basis for products for which SION has been
notified. Separate schemes exist for gems and jewellery sector for which FTP may be
referred.

Duty Drawback of Customs:
The scheme is administered by Department of Revenue. Under this scheme
products made out of duty paid inputs are first exported and thereafter refund of duty
is claimed in two ways:
i) All Industry Rates: As per Schedule
ii) Brand Rate
: As per application on the basis of data/documents

Interest Equalisation Scheme (IES):
The Government announced the Interest Equalisation Scheme @ 3% per annum
for Pre and Post Shipment Rupee Export Credit with effect from 1st April, 2015 for 5
years available to all exports under 416 tariff lines [at ITC (HS) code of 4 digit] and
exports made by Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) across all ITC(HS)
codes. With effect from November 2, 2018, the rate of Interest Equalisation for MSME
has been increased to 5%. The Scheme has also been extended to Merchant Exporters
who will now avail the benefit @ 3% for all exports under 416 tariff lines w.e.f.
January 2, 2019.

EXPORT PROMOTION CAPITAL GOODS SCHEMES (EPCG)
Zero Duty EPCG Scheme:
Under this scheme import of capital goods at zero custom duty is allowed for
producing quality goods and services to enhance India’s export competitiveness.
Import under EPCG shall be subject to export obligation equivalent to six times of duty
saved in six years. Scheme also allows indigenous sourcing of capital goods with 25%
less export obligation.

73 | P a g e

Post Export EPCG Duty Credit Scrip Scheme:
A Post Export EPCG Duty Credit Scrip Scheme shall be available for exporters
who intend to import capital goods on full payment of applicable duty in cash.

EOU/EHTP/STP & BTP Schemes:
Units undertaking to export their entire production of goods and services may be
set up under this scheme for import/ procurement domestically without payment of
duties. For details of the scheme and benefits available therein FTP may be required.

OTHER SCHEMES
Towns of Export Excellence (TEE):
Selected towns producing goods of Rs. 750 crores or more are notified as TEE on
potential for growth in exports and provide financial assistance under MAI Scheme to
recognized Associations.

Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme:
Under the Scheme, financial assistance is provided for export promotion activities
on focus country, focus product basis to EPCs, Industry & Trade Associations, etc.
The activities are like market studies/surveys, setting up showroom/warehouse,
participation in international trade fairs, publicity campaigns, brand promotion,
reimbursement of registration charges for pharmaceuticals, testing charges for
engineering products abroad, etc.
Details of the Scheme is available
at www.commerce.gov.in

Status Holder Scheme:
Upon achieving prescribed export performance, status recognition as one star
Export House, two Star Export House, three star export house, four star export house
and five star export house is accorded to the eligible applicants as per their export
performance. Such Status Holders are eligible for various non-fiscal privileges as
prescribed in the Foreign Trade Policy.
In addition to the above schemes, facilities like 24X7 customs clearance, single
window in customs, self assessment of customs duty, prior filing facility of shipping
bills etc are available to facilitate exports.
Status House
Category
One Star

74 | P a g e

Export performance Threshold (in
USD Million) during current and
previous 3 years
3

Two Star

15

Three Star

50

Four Star

200

Five Star

800

Rebate Of State And Central Levies And Taxes (ROSCTL) Scheme:
Scheme to rebate all embedded State and Central Taxes/levies for meant for
exports of made-up articles & garments.
There are various other export promotion schemes at central and state level
formulated / implemented by different ministries / departments / organisations and
export promotion councils / boards and authorities etc.

EXPORT PROMOTION OF CAPITAL GOODS (EPCG) SCHEME
Introduction:
The objective of the EPCG Scheme is to facilitate import of capital goods for
producing quality goods and services and enhance India’s manufacturing
competitiveness. EPCG Scheme allows import of capital goods (except those specified
in negative list in Appendix 5 F) for pre-production, production and post production at
zero customs duty. Capital goods imported under EPCG Authorisation for physical
exports are also exempted from IGST and Compensation Cess. The Authorisation
holder may also procure Capital Goods from indigenous sources in accordance with
provisions of paragraph 5.07 of FTP. Authorisation shall be valid for import for 24
months from the date of issue of Authorisation.

Capital goods for the purpose of the EPCG scheme shall include:
 Capital Goods as defined in Chapter 9 including in CKD/SKD condition thereof;
 Computer systems and software which are a part of the Capital Goods being
imported;
 Spares, moulds, dies, jigs, fixtures, tools & refractories and
 Catalysts for initial charge plus one subsequent charge.
EPCG scheme covers manufacturer exporters with or without supporting
manufacturer(s), merchant exporters tied to supporting manufacturer(s) and service
providers. Imported capital goods shall be subject to Actual User condition till export
obligation is completed and EODC is granted.

Coverage:
(a)

EPCG scheme covers manufacturer exporters with or without supporting
manufacturer(s), merchant exporters tied to supporting manufacturer(s) and
service providers. Name of supporting manufacturer(s) shall be endorsed on the
EPCG Authorisation before installation of the capital goods in the factory /
premises of the supporting manufacturer(s). In case of any change in supporting
manufacturer(s), the RA shall intimate such change to jurisdictional Customs
Authority of existing as well as changed supporting manufacturer(s) and the
Customs at port of registration of Authorisation.

75 | P a g e

(b)

Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) Scheme also covers a service provider
who is certified as a Common Service Provider (CSP) by the DGFT - HQs,
Department of Commerce in a Town of Export Excellence or Prime Minister Mega
Integrated Textile Region and Apparel Parks (PM MITRA) subject to provisions of
Foreign Trade Policy/Handbook of Procedures with the following conditions:
(i)
Common utility services like providing Electricity, Water, Gas, Sanitation,
Sewerage, Telecommunication, Transportation etc. shall not considered for
benefit of CSP;
(ii)

Export by users of the common service shall be counted towards fulfilment of EO
of the CSP provided the EPCG Authorisation details of the CSP is mentioned in
the respective Shipping bills and concerned RA must be informed about the
details of the users prior to such export;

(iii) Such export will not count towards fulfilment of specific export obligation in
respect of other EPCG Authorisations of the user;
(iv) Authorisation holder shall be required to submit Bank Guarantee (BG) which
shall be equivalent to the duty saved. BG can be given by CSP or by any one of
the users or a combination thereof, at the option of the CSP; and
(v) Capital goods shall be installed within a Town of Export Excellence or PM MITRA.

Export obligation:
 Import under EPCG Scheme is subject to an export obligation equivalent to 6
times of duties, taxes and cess saved on capital goods, to be fulfilled in 6 years
reckoned from date of issue of Authorization.
 EO shall be fulfilled by the authorization holder through export of goods which
are manufactured by him or his supporting manufacturer / services rendered
by him, for which the EPCG authorization has been granted.
 EO under the scheme shall be, over and above, the average level of exports
achieved by the applicant in the preceding three licensing years for the same
and similar products within the overall EO period including extended period, if
any; such average would be the arithmetic mean of export Performance in the
preceding three licensing years for same and similar products, Export shall be
physical export.
 However, specified deemed exports are also eligible for fulfilment of export
obligation. For exporters of Green Technology Products, Specific EO shall be 75
per cent of EO as stipulated.
 For units located in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and UTs of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, specific
EO shall be 25 per cent of the EO.
 With a view to accelerating exports, in cases where authorization holder has
fulfilled 75 per cent or more of specific export obligation and 100 per cent of
Average Export Obligation till date, if any, in half or less than half the original
export obligation period specified, remaining export obligation shall be
condoned.
76 | P a g e

Indigenous Sourcing of Capital Goods and benefits to Domestic Supplier:
A person holding an EPCG Authorisation may source capital goods from a
domestic manufacturer either through Invalidation Letter or through Advance Release
Order. Such domestic manufacturer shall be eligible for deemed export benefits under
paragraph 7.03 of FTP, and as may be provided under GST Rules under the category
of deemed exports. Such domestic sourcing shall also be permitted from EOUs and
these supplies shall be counted for purpose of fulfilment of positive NFE by said EOU
as provided in Para 6.08 (a) of FTP.

ADVANCE AUTHORIZATION (AA) SCHEME
Introduction:
Advance Authorisation is issued to allow duty free import of input, which is
physically incorporated in export product (making normal allowance for wastage). In
addition, fuel, oil, catalyst which is consumed / utilized in the process of production of
export product, may also be allowed Under Advance Authorisation scheme export
obligation is to be fulfilled by exporting finished products manufactured by imported
inputs with minimum value addition as mentioned below

Minimum Value Addition:
(i) Minimum value addition required to be achieved under Advance Authorisation is
15%.
(ii) Export Products where value addition could be less than 15% are given in
Appendix 4D.
(iii) Minimum value addition for Gems & Jewellery Sector is given in paragraph 4.60
of Handbook of Procedures.
(iv) In case of Tea, minimum value addition shall be 50%.
(iv) In case of spices, minimum value addition shall be 25%.

Domestic Sourcing of Inputs









Holder of an Advance Authorisation / Duty Free Import Authorisation can
procure
inputs
from
indigenous
supplier/
State
Trading
Enterprise/EOU/EHTP/BTP/ STP in lieu of direct import. Such
procurement can be against Advance Release Order (ARO), or Invalidation
Letter.
When domestic supplier intends to obtain duty free material for inputs
through Advance Authorisation for supplying resultant product to another
Advance Authorisation / DFIA /EPCG Authorisation, Regional Authority
shall issue Invalidation Letter.
Regional Authority shall issue Advance Release Order if the domestic
supplier intends to seek refund of duties exempted through Deemed
Exports mechanism as per provisions under Chapter-7 of FTP.
Regional Authority may issue Advance Release Order or Invalidation Letter
at the time of issue of Authorisation simultaneously or subsequently.
Advance Authorisation holder under DTA can procure inputs from / SEZ
units against Certificate of supply till EDI message system between SEZ
and Customs is enabled.

77 | P a g e

INCENTIVES
Introduction:
Exporting goods and services is the primary source of foreign exchange
earnings, which is a key component of domestic revenue. To export, you need a
developed economy and the ability to produce goods attractive to foreign buyers. This
means successful exporters have a significant market share within their country.
India has thousands of exporters and businesses selling internationally via
various mediums, including the increasingly popular e-Commerce exports. A thriving
and growing India-based e-commerce market is a major outlet for this nation’s export
potential.
The Indian Government aims to increase its gross domestic product (GDP)
from its current $3.3 trillion to $5 trillion by 2025. To reach this goal, the country
must increase its exports to $1 trillion at the same time. One way to do this is through
export incentives, which offer financial and non-financial incentives for exporters. This
means that every export business needs to be aware of these incentives to succeed.

Remission of Duties or Taxes on Export Products Scheme (RoDTEP):
RoDTEP stands for the Remission of Duties or Taxes on Export Products
Scheme. The scheme has been introduced with an objective to neutralize the taxes
and duties suffered on exported goods which are otherwise not credited or remitted or
refunded in any manner and remain embedded in the export goods. This scheme
provides for rebate of all hidden Central, State, and Local duties/taxes/levies on the
goods exported which have not been refunded under any other existing scheme. This
does not only include the direct cost incurred by the exporter but also the prior stage
cumulative indirect taxes on goods. It is a WTO compliant Scheme and follows the
global principle that the taxes/duties should not be exported; they should be either
exempted or remitted to exporters, to make the goods competitive in the global market.
The RoDTEP scheme has been made effective for the exports from 1st January 2021.
Scheme for Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP)
has been notified on exports from 1st January 2021 by Notification No. 19/2015-20
dated 17th August 2021. The Scheme creates a mechanism for re-imbursement of
taxes/ duties/ levies, which are currently not being refunded under any other
mechanism, at the central, state and local level, but which are incurred in the process
of manufacture and distribution of exported products. Major component of such taxes
is electricity duty and VAT on fuels used in transportation / distribution.
The RoDTEP Scheme is being implemented by the Central Board of Indirect
Taxes and Customs (CBIC), Department of Revenue in an end-to-end IT environment
and no separate application is required to be filed to claim RoDTEP benefits. RoDTEP
scheme covers around 10,436 export items (HS lines at 8 digits), which are listed in
78 | P a g e

the RoDTEP schedule, the Appendix 4R. RoDTEP Scheme operates under a budgetary
framework and Rs. 13,699 crore has been allocated for implementing the Scheme in
FY 22-23.

Deemed Exports:
“Deemed Exports” for the purpose of the Foreign Trade Policy refer to those
transactions in which goods supplied do not leave country, and payment for such
supplies is received either in Indian rupees or in free foreign exchange. Supply of
goods as specified in of FTP shall be regarded as “Deemed Exports” provided goods are
manufactured in India.
(i) Objectives:
 To provide a level-playing field to domestic manufacturers in certain specified
cases, as may be decided by the Government from time to time and promote
domestic industry.
 To provide duty free imports and duty exemption/ refund for products
manufactured in India.
 To reduce the dependency on imports.

(ii) Benefits:
Deemed exports shall be eligible for any / all of following benefits in respect of
manufacture and supply of goods, qualifying as deemed exports:

Duty Exemption: To provide duty free inputs for manufacture and supply under
Advance Authorisation / Advance Authorisation for annual requirement / DFIA
Schemes.
 TED Refund/Exemption: Refund of Terminal Excise duty paid on deemed
export supplies or exemption from paying such duties.
 Duty Drawback Refund: Refund of Basic Custom Duties paid on the inputs
utilized in manufacture and supply of the goods to the specified categories of
deemed exports.


The reimbursements are done based on the claims submitted to the Regional
Offices of DGFT after the supplies are made and payments against such
supplies are received.

FOREIGN EXCHANGE FLUCTUATIONS
Currency fluctuations are a natural outcome of floating exchange rates, which
is the norm for most major economies. Numerous factors influence exchange rates,
including a country's economic performance, the outlook for inflation, interest rate
79 | P a g e

differentials, capital flows and so on. A currency's exchange rate is typically
determined by the strength or weakness of the underlying economy. As such, a
currency's value can fluctuate from one moment to the next.





Currency exchange rates can impact merchandise trade, economic growth,
capital flows, inflation and interest rates.
Examples of large currency moves impacting financial markets include the
Asian Financial Crisis and the unwinding of the Japanese yen carry trade.
Investors can benefit from a weak greenback by investing in overseas equities.
A weaker dollar can boost their returns in U.S. dollar terms.
Investors should hedge their foreign currency risk via instruments such as
futures, forwards and options.

There are various kinds of exposure and related techniques for measuring the
exposure. Of all the exposures, economic exposure is the most important one and it
can be calculated statistically.

GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
Import of Samples:
No Authorisation shall be required for Import of bonafide technical and trade
samples of items “restricted” in ITC (HS) except defence/security items, seeds, bees
and new drugs. Duty free import of samples upto Rs.3,00,000 for all exporters shall be

allowed as per terms and conditions of Customs Notification.
Export of Samples:
a. Exports of bonafide trade and technical samples of freely exportable item shall
be allowed without any limit.
b. The procedure for Export of Samples and Free of charge goods shall be governed
by provisions given in Para 2.63 of Handbook of Procedures as below:
i.
ii.

Exports of trade and technical samples of freely exportable item shall be
allowed without any limit.
An application for export of samples/exhibits, which are restricted for
export, may be made to DGFT as per ANF-2Q.

Import of Gifts:
Import of goods, including those purchased from e-commerce portals, through
post or courier, where Customs clearance is sought as gifts, is prohibited except for
life saving drugs/ medicines and Rakhi (but not gifts related to Rakhi).

80 | P a g e

Explanation:




Rakhi (but not gifts related to Rakhi) will be covered under Section 25(6) of
Customs Act, 1962 that reads that “no duty shall be collected if the amount of
duty leviable is equal to or less than Rs. 100/-”
Import of goods as gifts with payment of full applicable duties is allowed.

Export of Gifts:
Goods including edible items, of value not exceeding Rs.5,00,000/- in a
licensing year, may be exported as a gift. However, items mentioned as restricted for
exports in ITC (HS) shall not be exported as a gift, without an Authorisation.

Import through Passenger Baggage:
a. Bona-fide household goods and personal effects may be imported as part of
passenger baggage as per limits, terms and conditions thereof in Baggage Rules
notified by Ministry of Finance.
b. Samples of such items that are otherwise freely importable under FTP may also
be imported as part of passenger baggage without an Authorisation subject to
Baggage Rules as notified by Customs from time to time.
c. Exporters coming from abroad are also allowed to import drawings, patterns,
labels, price tags, buttons, belts, trimming and embellishments required for
export, as part of their passenger baggage, without an Authorization subject to
value limit as laid down in FTP or as per the relevant Customs notification(s) in
this regard.
d. Any item(s) including Samples or Prototypes of items whose import policy is
“restricted” or “prohibited” or is canalised through STEs are not permitted as
part of passenger baggage except with a valid authorization/ permission issued
by DGFT.

Export through Passenger Baggage:
a. Bona-fide personal baggage may be exported either along with passenger or, if
unaccompanied, within one year before or after passenger’s departure from
India. However, items mentioned as restricted in ITC(HS) shall require an
Authorisation. Government of India officials proceeding abroad on official
postings shall, however, be permitted to carry along with their personal baggage,
food items (free, restricted or prohibited) strictly for their personal consumption.
The Provisions of the Para shall be subject to Baggage Rules issued under
Customs Act, 1962.
b. Samples of such items that are otherwise freely exportable under FTP may also
be exported as part of passenger baggage without an Authorisation.

81 | P a g e

Import Policy for Second Hand Goods:

Denomination of Export Contracts:
a. All export contracts and invoices shall be denominated either in freely
convertible currency or Indian rupees but export proceeds shall be realized in
freely convertible currency.
b. However, export proceeds against specific exports may also be realized in
rupees, provided it is through a freely convertible Vostro account of a nonresident bank situated in any country other than a member country of Asian
Clearing Union (ACU) or Nepal or Bhutan. Additionally, rupee payment through
Vostro account must be against payment in free foreign currency by buyer in his
non-resident bank account. Free foreign exchange remitted by buyer to his nonresident bank (after deducting bank service charges) on account of this
transaction would be taken as export realization under export promotion
schemes of FTP.
c. Contracts (for which payments are received through Asian Clearing Union (ACU)
shall be denominated in ACU Dollar. However, participants in the ACU may
settle their transactions in ACU Dollar or in ACU Euro as per RBI Notifications.
Central Government may relax provisions of this paragraph in appropriate
cases. Export contracts and invoices can be denominated in Indian rupees
against EXIM Bank/Government of India line of credit.
82 | P a g e

d. Invoicing, payment and settlement of exports and imports is also permissible in
INR subject to compliances as under RBI’s A.P. (DIR Series) Circular No.10
dated 11th July, 2022. Accordingly, settlement of trade transactions in INR shall
take place through the Special Rupee Vostro Accounts opened by AD banks in
India as permitted under Regulation 7(1) of Foreign Exchange Management
(Deposit) Regulations, 2016, in accordance to the following procedures:
i.

ii.

Indian importers undertaking imports through this mechanism shall
make payment in INR which shall be credited into the Special Vostro
account of the correspondent bank of the partner country, against the
invoices for the supply of goods or services from the overseas seller
/supplier.
Indian exporters, undertaking exports of goods and services through this
mechanism, shall be paid the export proceeds in INR from the balances
in the designated Special Vostro account of the correspondent bank of
the partner country.

BRC / e-BRC
Introduction:
An Electronic Bank Realisation Certificate (e-BRC) is a vital digital certificate
for export businesses. A bank issues the e-BRC to confirm that the buyer made
payment to the exporter against the export of services or goods. e-BRC or BRC details
are crucial economic indicators and financial information sources. Businesses availing
export benefits under the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) must produce a valid BRC. The
BRC is the proof of realisation of payment against exports.

BRC Certification:
A bank issues a Bank Realisation Certificate (BRC) as proof that an exporter
has received money from an importer for the exported goods. Exporters should report
to the bank the value of the goods that they intend to export. The banks will record
the export transactions on the Export Data Processing and Monitoring System
(EDPMS). When the exporters receive payments, they should submit all shipping bills
with the banks. They banks will cancel the items recorded in the EDPMS and issue an
e-BRC against the shipping bill payments.
An exporter requires a BRC to avail of the different export incentives offered
by the government, such as subsidies, low-cost loans, duty exemptions, etc., as part of
its FTP.
Before the introduction of e-BRC, exporters had to go to their banks and
apply for the issue of a BRC. The exporters submitted the BRC to the Directorate
General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) regional authority, and the transaction details of the
exports were entered manually according to the BRC. It was a time-consuming which
complicated the process of claiming export incentives.
83 | P a g e

With the introduction of the e-BRC by the DGFT in 2012, exporters did not
have to visit the bank to get the BRC, which made the process of claiming export
benefits and incentives from the DGFT and other export agencies more accessible.

e-BRC Certification:
The full form of e-BRC is Electronic Bank Realisation Certificate (e-BRC). An
e-BRC is an initiative by the DGFT to promote paperless trade and digitise BRCs.
From 17/08/2012, banks must transmit BRC data electronically to the DGFT server
secured by digital signature. The electronically transmitted BRCs by the banks are
known as e-BRCs.
DGFT receives shipping bill information electronically through the EDI ports.
With the integration of banks, DGFT receives foreign currency realisation details
which can be connected to all shipping bills. The information from the shipping bills
(FOB value of items exported) and the e-BRC (final payment received against export)
are linked to validate the value at which the exporter will receive an incentive.

Conclusion:
The export requires a lot of certification and licensing procedures; once those
processes are done and the products are ready for export, the export will see a high
rise in the value of the goods being exported outside the country. However, the timeconsuming process may take a long time and create obstacles if procedures are not
strictly followed.

***

84 | P a g e

IMPORTANT STATISTICS
1. India’s Overall Trade :
India's overall (Merchandise and Services) exports in 2021-22 were US$ 676.53
billion as against US$ 497.90 billion in 2020-21, registering a positive growth of 35.88
per cent. For the period April- December 2022* exports were estimated at US$ 568.57
billion as against US$ 489.69 billion during April-December 2021, registering a
positive growth of 16.11 per cent.
Overall exports to GDP ratio have been seeing a declining trend over the past few
years. However, it exhibited an increase in 2021-22 and stood at 21.30 per cent.
Overall imports in 2021-22 were US$ 760.06 billion, exhibiting a positive growth of
48.46 per cent over the same period in the previous year. For the period AprilDecember 2022* imports were estimated at US$ 686.70 billion as against US$ 546.95
billion during April-December 2021, registering a positive growth of 25.55 percent.
The broad trends in overall Exports, Imports and Trade Balance since 2011-12 are
indicated in the graph below:

2. INDIA’S MERCHANDISE TRADE:
India’s merchandise exports showed resilience. Exports for the complete financial year
i.e. 2021-22 were US$ 422 billion as against US$ 291.81 billion during 2020-21,
registering a positive growth of 44.62 percent.

85 | P a g e

India’s monthly merchandise exports remained in the range of US$ 30 billion to US$
45 billion during FY 2021-22 with the highest ever exports recorded in the month of
March 2022 at US$ 44.57 billion.
The trade deficit in 2021-22 was estimated at US$ 191.05 billion as against the deficit
of 102.63 billion in 2020-21. In April-December 2022(QE), trade deficit increased to
US$ 218.94 billion from US$ 136.45 billion in April-December 2021.
The broad trends of Merchandise Exports, Imports and Trade Balance since 2011-12
are given in the table below:

3. INDIA’S SERVICES TRADE:
The services sector has been the dominant sector in India’s GDP, with significant
contribution to exports and FDI. The pandemic has had a significant impact; however,
the services sector has shown resilience to the economic disruptions. Services exports
in 2021-22 stood at US$ 254.53 billion as compared to US$ 206.09 billion recorded in
2020-21, which is a positive growth of 23.50 per cent.
Services exports contribution to India’s GDP has been exhibiting an increasing trend,
from 7.70 per cent in 2018-19 to 8.01 per cent in 2021-22.
The broad trends in Services Exports, Imports and Trade Balance in the last ten years
are given in the table below:
86 | P a g e

4. MAJOR COMMODITIES OF EXPORT AND IMPORT IN 2021-22:

87 | P a g e

5. MAJOR EXPORT DESTINATIONS AND IMPORT SOURCES IN 2021-22:

88 | P a g e

6. ASEAN Trade:
India's trade with ASEAN countries was US$ 110.66 billion during the year 2021-22
and US$ 79.84 billion during 2022-23 (April-October (P). Major destinations for India's
exports and imports in the region are Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and
Vietnam. The major commodities of export include Petroleum Products, Iron & Steel,
Bovine Meat, Ship, Boat and floating structure, and Pharmaceutical products. The
major commodities of import include Vegetable Oils, Coal, Organic chemicals,
Computer hardware, and Plastic raw materials.

89 | P a g e

7. TRADE WITH LATIN AMERICAN & CARIBBEAN:
Latin America & Caribbean (LAC) region has emerged as potential growth market for
India with significant complementarities and synergies in trade and business. LAC
region comprises of 43 countries. India is among Latin America's top ten global export
destinations. Total bilateral merchandise trade with the region increased from US$
1.49 billion in 2000-01 to US$ 36.67 billion in 2021-22. LAC region accounts for 3.54
per cent of India's Global trade.

8. TRADE WITH COMMON WEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES (CIS):
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) comprises the Russian Federation,
Republic of Armenia, Republic of Azerbaijan, Republic of Belarus, Georgia, Moldova,
Republic of Ukraine, Republic of Kazakhstan, Republic of Kyrgyzstan, Republic of
Tajikistan, Republic of Turkmenistan and Republic of Uzbekistan.
Data regarding bilateral trade with these countries is shown in the Table below:

***
90 | P a g e

REFERENCES
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act 1992
Foreign trade (regulation) 1993
Foreign Trade Policy 2023
Handbook of Procedures 2023
Customs Act 1962
Baggage rules 2016
www.commerce.gov.in
www.dgft.gov.in
www.indiantradeportal.in

https://apeda.gov.in/apedawebsite/

https://www.jute.com/

https://www.aepcindia.com/

https://mpeda.gov.in/

https://chemexcil.in/

https://www.projectexports.com/

http://cepc.co.in/

https://plexconcil.org/

http://www.cashewindia.org/

https://www.pdexcil.org/

https://www.indiacoffee.org/

https://pharmexcil.com/

http://coirboard.gov.in/

http://rubberboard.org.in/public

https://texprocil.org/

https://www.servicesepc.org/

https://leatherindia.org/

https://www.shefexil.org/

https://www.eepcindia.org/

http://www.indianspices.com/

https://www.escindia.in/

http://sportsgoodsindia.org/

https://www.epch.in/

http://www.srtepc.org/

https://gjepc.org/

https://www.teaboard.gov.in/

https://www.hepcindia.com/

https://tobaccoboard.com/

theindiansilkexportpromotioncouncil.com/

https://www.wwepcindia.com/

***
_____________________________________

GST AND EXPORTS

By
Office of the Additional DGFT, Hyderabad

Index
INTRODUCTION TO GST ................................................................................................. 2
IMPACT OF GST ON EXPORTS ...................................................................................... 3
Zero Rating of Exports: .................................................................................................. 4
Drawback/Refund .............................................................................................................. 7
Impact on MEIS and SEIS ................................................................................................. 8
SEZs ................................................................................................................................. 9
Supply of Goods to EOU (Purchase by EOU from DTA) .................................................. 10
Supply of Goods by EOU................................................................................................. 11
Supply from EOU to EOU ................................................................................................ 11
Tax Benefits for EOU under GST..................................................................................... 11
DEEMED EXPORTS ....................................................................................................... 12
ADVANCE AUTHORIZATION ......................................................................................... 13
EXPORT PROMOTION FOR CAPITAL GOODS............................................................. 14
IMPORTS AND IGST ................................................................................................... 15

GST & Exports

Page 1

INTRODUCTION TO GST
GST is known as the Goods and Services Tax. It is an indirect tax which has
replaced many indirect taxes in India such as the excise duty, VAT, services tax, etc.
The Goods and Service Tax Act was passed in the Parliament on 29th March 2017
and it came into effect on 1st July 2017.
Goods and Services Tax Law in India is a comprehensive, multi-stage,
destination-based tax that is levied on every value addition. GST is a single
domestic indirect tax law for the entire country. Under the GST regime, the tax is
levied at every point of sale. In the case of intra-state sales, Central GST and State
GST are charged. All the inter-state sales are chargeable to the Integrated GST.
The advantage of having one single tax means every state follows the same
rate for a particular product or service. Tax compliance is also better as taxpayers
are not bogged down with multiple return forms and deadlines. Overall, it’s a unified
system of indirect tax compliance. GST has also helped in widening the tax base in
India.

One of the primary objectives of GST was to remove the cascading
effect of taxes. Under GST, the tax levy is only on the net value added at each
stage of the supply chain. This has contributed to the seamless flow of input tax
credits across both goods and services. Introducing GST has also led to an increase
in consumption and indirect tax revenues.
Due to GST being a nationwide tax and having a centralised surveillance
system, the clampdown on defaulters is quicker and far more efficient. Hence, GST
has curbed tax evasion and minimised tax fraud from taking place to a large extent.

GST & Exports

Page 2

GST minimises transportation cycle times, improves supply chain and
turnaround time, and leads to warehouse consolidation, among other benefits. With
the e-way bill system under GST, the removal of interstate checkpoints is most
beneficial to the sector in improving transit and destination efficiency.

IMPACT OF GST ON EXPORTS
Exports are defined under Section 2(e) of the FTD&R Act, 1992. Export of goods, as
per this definition, refers to taking goods out of India by land, sea or air. Section 7 of
the act also mandates the use of an Importer-Exporter Code (IEC) for the purposes
of import and export. This IEC is issued by the DGFT.
The definition of “export of goods” in section 2(5) of IGST Act has been
straight taken from section 2(18) of the Customs Act, 1962 and means taking goods
out of India to a place outside India.
Importer-Exporter Code
For all IECs issued with effect from 1.07.2017, PAN number itself would be the IEC
number and would be authorised as IEC.
The GSTIN is the key identifier at the transaction level. The importer/exporter
needs to declare IEC and GSTIN (wherever registered with GST) at the time of
import/export of goods. The PAN level aggregation of data would automatically
happen in the system, thereby ensuring seamless integration of IEC data flowing to
Customs along with GSTIN.

GST & Exports

Page 3

IEC generated
by DGFT

Old IECs linked to PAN
while new IECs are
same as PAN

Information forwarded
to ICEGATE (Customs)

Use IEC in ICEGATE for
Export – Import
transactions

All other information
linked to IEC through
PAN data

Zero Rating of Exports:
The export of goods or services is considered as a zero-rated supply. GST will
not be levied on export of any kind of goods or services. The exporter has the option
either to export under bond/Letter of Undertaking without payment of tax and claim
refund of ITC or pay IGST by utilizing ITC or in cash at the time of export and claim
refund of IGST paid.
Zero rating means that the entire value chain of the supply is exempt
from tax. This is done by employing the following means:
•

The taxes paid on the supplies which are zero rated are refunded

•

The credit of inputs/ input services is allowed or is refunded in cases where
already paid
As per section 16 (1) of CGST Act, 2017 - “zero rated supply” means any of

the following supplies of goods or services or both, namely:

GST & Exports

Page 4

A registered person making zero rated supply shall be eligible to claim refund
under either of the following options, namely:
•

he may supply goods or services or both under bond or Letter of Undertaking,
subject to such conditions, safeguards and procedure as may be prescribed,
without payment of integrated tax and claim refund of unutilised ITC; or

•

he may supply goods or services or both, subject to such conditions, safeguards
and procedure as may be prescribed, on payment of integrated tax and claim
refund of such tax paid on goods or services or both supplied,

Merchant Export
A merchant exporter is a person who is involved in trading activity and exporting or
intending to export. They do not have a manufacturing unit. They buy goods from a
manufacturer-exporter and then ship them to foreign customers.
Merchant exports are liable to GST as the merchant exporter is located in
India, and makes a supply to a place outside India. Thus, merchant exporters are
compulsorily required to obtain registration under GST.

Where a merchant exporter exports goods without payment of tax, procures
goods at 0.1% and then claims refund of the same :
The merchant exporter can claim a refund of the unutilised ITC at the end of a tax
period in case of zero-rated goods or goods involving an inverted tax structure.
GST & Exports

Page 5

Where a supplier is supplying to a merchant exporter at a regular rate and
exports are done with the payment of IGST :
The standard tax regime will be followed by the supplier, where ITC shall be used for
payment of output tax and the balance liability is to be paid in cash. Merchant
exporters can claim a refund of both unutilised ITC and IGST paid against zero-rated
supply.
Where a supplier of a merchant exporter procures goods from another supplier
and claims refund under Inverted Duty Structure :
The second supplier can claim a refund of ITC under an inverted tax structure (rate
of tax on inputs is higher than the rate of tax on outputs). An illustration of Inverted
Duty Structure is given below.

GST & Exports

Page 6

Drawback/Refund
A duty drawback was provided under the previous laws for the tax paid on inputs for
the export of exempted goods. Under GST, the duty drawback would only be
available for the customs duty paid on imported inputs or central excise paid on
certain petroleum or tobacco products used as inputs or fuel for captive power
generation.

An exporter dealing in zero-rated goods under GST can claim a refund for zero-rated
supplies as per the following options:
•

Supply goods or services, or both, under bond or LUT; subject to such
conditions, safeguards and procedure as may be prescribed, without payment
of integrated tax, and then claim a refund of unutilised input tax credit.

•

Any exporter or United Nations or Embassy or other agencies/bodies as
specified in section 55 who supplies goods or services, or both, after fulfilling
certain conditions, safeguards and procedures as may be prescribed; and
paying the IGST, can claim refund of such tax paid on the supplied goods or
services, or both.

GST & Exports

Page 7

Impact on MEIS and SEIS
These scrips can be utilized only for
1. Payment of Basic Customs Duty and Additional Customs Duty specified
under sections 3(1), 3(3) and 3(5) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 for import
of inputs or goods, including capital goods, as per DoR Notification, except
items listed in Appendix 3A.
2. Payment of Central excise duties on domestic procurement of inputs or
goods
Further, Additional Customs duty specified under Sections 3(1), 3(3) and 3(5) of the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975 /Central excise duty paid in cash or through debit under
Duty Credit scrip shall be adjusted as CENVAT Credit or Duty Drawback as per
DoR rules or notifications. Basic Custom duty paid in cash or through debit under
Duty Credit scrip shall be adjusted for Duty Drawback as per DoR rules or
notifications.
The scrips cannot be used for payment of any type of GSTIGST/CGST/SGST/UTGST or compensation cess.

GST & Exports

Page 8

SEZs
A Special Economic Zone (SEZ) is a zone wherein businesses enjoy simpler tax and
easier legal difficulties. It is located in a country’s national borders only, but they are
treated as foreign territory for tax purpose.
In GST, SEZ will have Integrated Goods and Service Tax (IGST) as it will not
be considered as a part of India. Export means taking goods or services out of
Special Economic Zone by any mode of transport or supply of goods or service from
one unit in the SEZ to another unit in another SEZ. Import means bringing goods or
services into a Special Economic Zone by any mode of transport or receiving goods
or services from one unit by another unit located in another SEZ.

Being in a SEZ gives advantage as any supply of goods or services or both to
a Special Economic Zone unit or by developer will be considered as Zero Rated
Supply.
Supplies to SEZ are considered as exports, the supplier supplying goods to
SEZ can first supply under bond or he can make a letter of undertaking for making
supply of without payment of IGST and can also claim credit of ITC or he can supply
on payment of IGST and can claim refund.
When a SEZ unit or a developer supplies any goods or services or both to any
one, it will be also considered as integrated supply and will attract the Integrated
Goods and Service Tax (IGST).
There is only one exception to above rule. If an SEZ unit supplies goods or
service or both to Domestic Tariff Area (DTA), it will be considered as export to DTA
and custom duties and import duties will be payable.
The transporter has to carry the E-Way Bill of transportation of goods from
one place to another if the value is more than Rs. 50,000. The supply under SEZ is
treated as inter-state supply. The developer of Special Economic Zone shall have to
follow the same procedure of E-Way Bill as the other industry follows.

GST & Exports

Page 9

EOUs
Export Oriented Unit (EOU) scheme was introduced in the year 1981. Under EOU
scheme, units registered as a EOU are required to export their entire production of
goods and services. However, certain portion is allowed to be sold out in domestic
tariff area (DTA).

The main objective of introduction of Export Oriented Unit scheme is to
increase exports, to increase foreign exchange earnings in the country and generate
additional employment.

Supply of Goods to EOU (Purchase by EOU from DTA)
Under GST, there is no exemption available to supplier of goods to EOU. IGST,
CGST and SGST, as applicable, will be payable by the supplier who supplies the
goods to EOU. EOU has two options to offset GST paid on goods received from
suppliers, the options are narrated below:
GST & Exports

Page 10

•

To take input tax credit of GST paid and utilizes the same towards supplies
made by EOU to DTA.

•

Claim refund of GST paid.

It is always advisable to go for the first option. Option 2 is available only when there
are no enough DTA supplies against which input tax credit can be used.

Supply of Goods by EOU
When EOU units supply admissible goods to DTA units, EOU units are required to
pay applicable GST on such supply. Only in case of zero rated supplies, as defined
under section 16 of the IGST Act (namely export of goods and services, or, supply of
goods and services to SEZs), EOU are exempted from payment of GST.

Supply from EOU to EOU
When the goods are supplied by one EOU to another EOU, such supply would be
treated as any other supplies under GST law and hence GST would be payable on
the same as payable under any other supplies.

Tax Benefits for EOU under GST
The only benefit available to EOU unit is duty free import i.e. benefit of basic
customs duty exemption is available to EOU.

Further, exemption from the additional duties of customs, if any, under section
3(1), section 3(3) and section 3(5) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and exemption
from central excise duty will be available for goods specified under the Fourth
Schedule to the Central Excise Act.

GST & Exports

Page 11

DEEMED EXPORTS
As per the Foreign Trade Policy, Deemed Exports refer to those transactions in
which goods supplied do not leave the country, and payment is realized either in
Indian currency or free foreign exchange. The precise categories of deemed exports
are defined in Para 7.02 of the FTP.
“Deemed Exports” refers to supplies of goods manufactured in India (and not
services) which are notified as deemed exports under Section 147 of the
CGST/SGST Act, 2017. The supplies do not leave India. The payment for such
supplies is received either in Indian rupees or in convertible foreign exchange.

Deemed exports are not zero rated supplies by default, unlike the
regular exports. Hence all supplies notified as supply for deemed export will be
subject to levy of taxes i.e. such supplies can be made on payment of tax and
cannot be supplied under a Bond/LUT. However, the refund of tax paid on the
supply regarded as Deemed export is admissible to either the supplier or the
recipient. The application for refund has to be filed by the supplier or recipient
(subject to certain conditions) of deemed export supplies, as the case may be.
Categories of supply of goods notified as Deemed Exports as per para 7.02 of
FTP:
•

Supply of goods by a registered person against Advance Authorisation

•

Supply of capital goods by a registered person against Export Promotion
Capital Goods Authorisation

•

Supply of goods by a registered person to Export Oriented Unit
(EOU/EHTP/STP)

•

Supply of gold by a bank or Public Sector Undertaking specified in the
notification No. 50/2017-Customs, dated the 30th June, 2017 (as amended)
against Advance Authorization

GST & Exports

Page 12

ADVANCE AUTHORIZATION
Advance Authorization is a scheme under the Foreign Trade Policy where the
import of inputs is allowed to be made duty-free (after making normal allowance for
wastage), if they are physically incorporated in a product which is going to be
exported. An export obligation is usually set as a condition for issuing Advance
Authorization.
Imports under Advance Authorization are exempted from payment of Basic
Customs Duty, Additional Customs Duty, Education Cess, Anti-dumping Duty,
Countervailing Duty, Safeguard Duty, Transition Product Specific Safeguard Duty
wherever applicable. Imports against Advance Authorizations are exempted from
Integrated Tax and Compensation Cess vide various DGFT notifications, the latest
one being DGFT Notification No. 16/2015-20 dated 01.07.2022.

DUTY FREE IMPORT AUTHORIZATION
Duty Free Import Authorization is issued to allow duty free import of inputs. In
addition, import of oil and catalyst which is consumed/ utilized in the process of
production of export product may also be allowed.

GST & Exports

Page 13

Duty Free Import Authorization shall be exempted only from payment of Basic
Customs Duty (BCD).

EXPORT PROMOTION FOR CAPITAL GOODS
EPCG Scheme allows import of capital goods (except those specified in negative list
in Appendix 5 F) for pre-production, production and postproduction at zero customs
duty.
Capital goods for the purpose of the EPCG scheme shall include:
•

Capital Goods as defined in Chapter 9 of FTP 2015-2020 including in
CKD/SKD condition thereof.

•

Computer systems and software which are a part of the Capital Goods being
imported.

•

Spares, moulds, dies, jigs, fixtures, tools & refractories.

•

Catalysts for initial charge plus one subsequent charge.

•

Import of capital goods for Project Imports notified by Central Board of Excise
and Customs is also permitted under EPCG Scheme.

Capital goods imported under EPCG Authorization for physical exports are
also exempt from IGST and Compensation Cess under the Notification No.
37/2022 – Customs dated 30th June 2022.

GST & Exports

Page 14

IMPORTS AND IGST
The import of goods has been defined in the IGST Act, 2017 as bringing
goods into India from a place outside India. All imports shall be deemed as interState supplies and accordingly integrated tax shall be levied in addition to the
applicable Custom duties.
The integrated tax on goods shall be in addition to the applicable Basic
Customs Duty (BCD) which is levied as per the Customs Tariff Act. In addition, GST
compensation cess may also be leviable on certain luxury and demerit goods under
the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Cess Act, 2017.

For imports made under Advance Authorization/EPCG schemes, the
corresponding components under the respective headers are waived off, in the bill of
entry. A sample scenario is presented below.
The taxes will be calculated as under:
Particulars
A
Assessable Value
B
Basic Customs Duty@10%
C
Education Cess @3%
D
Value for Integrated Tax
E
Integrated Tax @18%
F
Value for Compensation
Cess
G
Compensation Cess @ 15%
H
Total Duty ( B+C +E+G)

Duty(Rs.)
100/10/0.3/110.30
19.85
110.30
16.55
46.70

In cases where imported goods are liable to Anti-Dumping Duty or Safeguard
Duty, value for calculation of IGST as well as Compensation Cess shall also include
Anti-Dumping Duty amount and Safeguard duty amount.

GST & Exports

Page 15

Place of Supply
The place of supply of goods imported into India shall be the location of the importer.
Thus, if an importer say is located in Telangana, the SGST component of the IGST
paid at the time of import shall accrue to Telangana.
CUSTOMS BONDED WAREHOUSE
Supply of goods when the goods are still in Customs Bonded Warehouse: In
general, Customs Bonded warehouse is also treated as Customs Area. The customs
duty is charged only when the goods are ex-bonded i.e when the goods are removed
from the Customs bonded warehouse.
The integrated tax shall be levied and collected at the time of final clearance
of the customs-bonded warehoused goods for home consumption i.e., at the time of
filing the ex-bond bill of entry and the value addition accruing at each stage of supply
shall form part of the value on which the integrated tax would be payable at the time
of clearance of the warehoused goods for home consumption.

GST & Exports

Page 16

HIGH SEA SALES
'High Sea Sales' is a common trade practice whereby the original importer sells the
goods to a third person before the goods are entered for customs clearance. After
the High sea sale of the goods, the Customs declarations i.e. Bill of Entry etc is filed
by the person who buys the goods from the original importer during the said sale.
IGST on high sea sale (s) transactions of imported goods, whether one or
multiple, shall be levied and collected only at the time of importation i.e. when the
import declarations are filed before the Customs authorities for the customs
clearance purposes for the first time. Further, value addition accruing in each such
high sea sale shall form part of the value on which IGST is collected at the time of
clearance.

GST & Exports

Page 17





_______________


EXPORT

SCHEMES

TRADE PROMOTION WING

OFFICE OF THE ADDITIONAL DGFT, MUMBAI.

Index
Sl.
Details of the Scheme
No
Schemes Implemented by Department of Commerce
1.
Advance Authorisation (AA)

Page No
3

2.

Duty Free Import Authorisation (DFIA)

3

3.

Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPGC)

4

4.

Deemed Exports

4

5.

Status Holder Certificate

4

6.

Interest Equalization Scheme (IES)

5

7

Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme
Schemes Implemented by Department of Revenue

5

8.

Duty Drawback

6

9.

Refund of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP)

6

10.

Export of Apparel/Garments and made-ups (RosCTL)

6

Schemes Implemented by Other Agencies

11.

Export Development & Promotion of Spices

7

12.

Export Promotion- Providing Transit/Freight Assistance for Coffee
Exports

7

13.

The Financial Assistance Scheme (FAS)

8

Schemes Implemented by Dept of Commerce
1. Advance Authorisation (AA)
Advance Authorisation Scheme (AA) allows duty free import of inputs, which are physically incorporated in export product (making normal allowance for w
Fuel, oil, catalyst which is consumed / utilized in the process of production of export product, may also be allowed.
Imports under Advance Authorisation are exempted from payment of Basic Customs Duty, Additional Customs Duty, Education
Anti-dumping Duty, Countervailing Duty, Safeguard Duty,
Transition Product Specific Safeguard Duty, wherever applicable. Integrated Goods & Service tax
and Compensation Cess are also exempted.
A Manufacturer Exporter or a Merchant Exporter
tied to a supporting manufacturer can apply for AA
Scheme.

Advance Authorisaiton Scheme allows inputs
based on notified Standard Input Output Norms
(SION) or on Self Declaration basis subject to
procedures set out in Handbook of
Except for Gems & Jewellery and some specified
products exporter must maintain minimum 15% Value Addition under the Scheme. Value Addition is
calculated as per the formula provided in the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP)
Advance Authorisation for Annual Requirement is
also available under the
Inputs Imported
under the Advance Authorisation Scheme (AA) are
subject to Actual User Condition.
The Exporter must complete its Export Obligation under scheme within 18 Months and Authorisation is valid for 12
Both periods can be extended based on procedures set out in
the Handbook of

2. Duty Free Import Authorisation (DFIA)
Similar to the Advance Authorisation Scheme (AA), Duty Free Import Authorisation (DFIA) allows
duty free import of inputs but on Post Export basis only.
Inputs Imported under DFIA are only exempted of the Basic Customs Duty only.

Only Inputs notified under Standard Input Output Norms (SION) are eligible to be imported under
the
Minimum Value Addition of 20% is required to be achieved.
Merchant Exporter can also avail the benefit by mentioning the name and address of supporting
manufacturer on export documents viz. Shipping Bill / Bill of Export / Tax Invoice

Under the scheme a DFIA, Duty Credit Scrip is issued on post export basis which m e a n s t h a t the Inputs used in the export products can be imported after
The Scrip is valid for 12 Months from the date of

The DFIA Scrip is freely r

r

3. Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG)
The Objective of the EPCG Scheme is to facilitate import of Capital Goods for producing quality
goods and services to enhance India’s export
The EPCG Scheme allows Import of Capital Goods at Zero
Customs Duty. Integrated Goods and Service Tax (IGST)
and compensation Cess are also exempted under the
Exporters availing the scheme must export goods equivalent to 6 times of
i
taxes and cess saved on the
capital
to
be fulfilled within 6 years reckoned from date of issue of
Exports done by exporter under various other schemes like Duty Drawback, Advance
DFIA, or Deemed Exports would also be considered for fulfilment of obligation under EPCG
Scheme.
A Post Export EPCG Scheme is also available for exporters who wish to get refund instead of exemption.

4. Deemed Exports
“Deemed Exports” for the purpose of Foreign Trade Policy refer to those transactions in which
goods supplied do not leave country, and payment for such supplies is received either in Indian
rupees or in free foreign exchange.
Various categories of supply by manufacturer and supply by main and sub contractor are covered
under the Deemed Export Scheme. These include Supply of goods against Advance
Supply to EOU, Supply of goods to United Nations or International organization for their official use
etc. This scheme provides a level-playing field to domestic manufacturers in certain specified cases.
Under Deemed
the supplier shall be eligible for any / all of following benefits in respect
of manufacture and supply of goods


Advance Authorisation / Advance Authorisation for annual requirement/DFIA



Deemed Export Drawback for BCD.



Refund of terminal excise duty for excisable

5. Status Holder Certificate
In recognition to the business leaders who have excelled in international trade and have successfully contributed to country’s foreign trade, Status Holder Certificates are
e
Status Holder recognition will depend on export performance achieved by the exporter in current year and previous three financial years (for Gems& Jewellery Sector the performance during
the current and previous two financial years shall be considered for recognition as status holder).
The export performance will be counted on the basis of FOB of export earning in freely convertible foreign
There are 5 Categories from One Star Export House to Five Star Export

Various privileges are accorded to Star Export Houses based on the certification
https://www.dgft.gov.in/CP

.

6. Interest Equalization Scheme (IES)
The Government of India has announced the Interest Equalisation Scheme on Pre and Post
Shipment Rupee Export Credit to eligible
r r
The Scheme is extended from October 1, 2021 and ends on March 31, 2024.
All exporters seeking benefit under the Interest Equalisation Scheme need to apply a Unique IES
Identification Number (UIN) from DGFT
The UIN generated shall have a validity of 1 year from the date of r
r
during which an
application for availing benefit of IES can be submitted to the concerned bank.

Details: https://www.dgft.gov.in/CP/?opt=application-help#:~:text=IES

7. Market Access Initiative (MAI)
Market Access Initiative (MAI) Scheme is an Export Promotion Scheme envisaged to act as a catalyst to promote India’s exports on a sustained basis. The scheme is formulated on focus product-focus country approach to evolve specific market and specific product through market studies/survey. Assistance would be provided to Export Promotion Organizations/Trade Promotion
Organizations/National Level Institutions/ Research Institutions/Universities/Laboratories, Exporters etc., for enhancement of exports through accessing new markets or through increasing
the share in the existing markets. Under the Scheme the level of assistance for each eligible activities has been fixed.
The following activities will be eligible for financial assistance under the Scheme:


Marketing Projects Abroad



Capacity Building



Support for Statutory Compliances



Studies



Project Development



Developing Foreign Trade Facilitation web Portal



To support Cottage and handicrafts units

https://commerce.gov.in/international-trade/trade-promotion-programmes-and-schemes/tradepromotion-programme-focus-cis/market-access-initiative-mai-scheme/

Schemes Administered by Dept of Revenue
8. Duty Drawback (DBK)
Duty Drawback (DBK) allows rebate of duty on any goods manufactured in India and Exported.
DBK excludes Integrated Goods and Service Tax (IGST) and Compensation
The Duty Drawback Scheme is administered by Department of Revenue.

9. Refund of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products
(RoDTEP)
The scheme has been introduced with an objective to neutralize the taxes and duties suffered on
exported goods which are otherwise not credited or remitted or refunded in any manner and remain embedded in the export goods.
The duties/taxes/levies at the Central, State and local level, borne on a export product, including
prior stage cumulative indirect taxes on goods and services in production of exported products
and other indirect duties/taxes/levies in respect to distribution of the exported goods is refunded
under the
The Scheme is notified by Department of Commerce and administered by Department of Revenue.
The Scheme is effective for exports done from 1st January 2021.
RoDTEP rate schedule has been notified and based on the same transferable e-scrips are issued
and are to be used only for payment of Basic Customs Duty.
https://cip.icegate.gov.in/CIP/static/images/doc/RoDTEP/FAQ2.pdf

10. Export
(RoSCTL)

of

Apparel/Garments

and

Made-ups

The Scheme is applicable for apparel/garments (under Chapter 61 and 62) and Made-ups (under
Chapter 63)

The Scheme is continued from 01st January 2021 to 31st March 2024.
The Scheme is notified by The Ministry of Textiles and implemented by Department of Revenue with end to end digitization for issuance of transferable Duty Credit Scrip, which will be
maintained in an electronic ledger in the Customs
(ICEGATE)

https://cip.icegate.gov.in/CIP/static/images/doc/RoDTEP/FAQs1.pdf

Schemes Implemented by Other Agencies
11. Export Development & Promotion of Spices
The programme under the scheme ‘Export Development and Promotion’ aims to support exporters to adopt high technology processing or to upgrade existing level of technologies for highend value addition and to develop capabilities to meet the changing food safety standards in the
importing countries. The scheme also caters to promoting the Indian spices exporter by assisting
them in promotion of Indian Goods in International Trade Fairs, Seminars, etc. by reimbursing
their expenditure on the same.
The core benefit areas of the scheme include Infrastructure development, Research on new
applications of spices & new product development, Promotion of Indian Spice Brand abroad, setting up of Infrastructure for common cleaning, grading, processing, packing, storing facilities
(Spices Park) in major spice growing/marketing centers, promotion of organic spices, special
programmers for North East entrepreneurs etc.
The Spices Board is also participating in international trade fairs
and
exhibitions to show case India's strengths and capabilities in spice processing and value addition.
Some of the financial fiscal benefits include:
1. Reimbursement of 50% airfare with limits as per terms for individual exporters
2. For delegations, 50% reimbursement with INR1.5 lakh limit per year per exporter

Details: http://www.indianspices.com/

12. Export Promotion - Providing Transit/ Freight
Assistance for Coffee Exports
1. The objective of the scheme is to maximize export earnings by enhancing the market share of
value added coffees and high value differentiated coffees in important high value international
markets.
2. All the Registered coffee Exporters with coffee Board having valid registration are eligible for the

benefits under the scheme
Scale of Transit/Freight Assistance
i) Rs.2/.per kg.for the export of High Value Green coffees to far off high value ' market viz., U.S.A.,
Canada, Japan, Australia, New Zealand' South Korea and Finland and Norway.
ii) Rs.3/.per Kg.for export of Value. Added Coffees in retail consumer packs ' exported as “India
Brand" calculated on the Green coffee utilized for its manufacture/preparation at the rate of maximum of 2.6kg for instant/soluble coffee and 1.19 kgs for Roasted coffee seeds and R & G Coffees'

Details: https://indiacoffee.org/Schemes/ICDP_MTF_Export_Promn_2021_22.pdf

13. The Financial Assistance Scheme (FAS)
The Financial Assistance Scheme (FAS) is an export promotion scheme run by APEDA. The scheme
aims to facilitate the export of agri-products by providing assistance to exporters.
Financial assistance is provided in three broad areas, namely:

i) Development of Export Infrastructure
APEDA recognizes the importance of infrastructure for growth of agro-industries and export of
agricultural products in the value chain. The scheme component covers both fresh produce
and processed food products. The objective of the scheme is to reduce losses caused due to
spoilage and to ensure quality production of agro products. To achieve this, it seeks to set up
post-harvest handling facilities.

ii) Quality Development
To participate/engage in international trade, it is necessary to comply with Food Safety requirements of different countries. Several importing countries demand adherence to stringent
Maximum Residue Levels (MRLs). Some of the developed importing countries have set up MRLs
at very low level. For this, high precision equipment are required to be installed by the food

testing labs. Under this component, assistance is provided to comply with the prescribed
standards of importing countries.

iii) Market Development
This component helps exporters to achieve market access in new markets and help sustain
their presence in the existing markets. It covers structured marketing strategies for export of
food products, market intelligence for taking informed decisions, international exposure, skill
development, capacity building and high quality packaging. The assistance under this component covers the following:

https://apeda.gov.in/apedawebsite/Announcements/FAS_Guidelines_05102021.pdf?
v=1

______________________







